CODE OF THE CITY OF ELLAVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted November 10, 2008 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ELLAVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
David Theiss 
Mayor 
____________ 
Desse Powers 
Nathaniel Thornton 
Desse Powers 
Matt Icard 
Patricia Jones 
Clint Long 
City Council 
____________ 
Bob Anderson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jimmy Skipper 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Deborah Pilcher 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ELLAVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
David Theiss 
Mayor 
____________ 
Leslie Haynes-Minter 
Charles Sherwood 
Billy Lightner 
Carlton Wilson 
Janet Ellis 
City Council 
____________ 
Debbie Pilcher 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Jimmy Skipper 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Wendy McGrother 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Ellaville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the City Council through September 11, 2006. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Karen Kopetskie, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Debbie Pilcher, City Clerk, and Jimmy Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ellaville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ellaville, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ellaville, Georgia. 2008. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ELLAVILLE. GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1.	The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Ellaville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.	All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 11, 2006, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3.	The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.	Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and incarceration for a period not exceeding six months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.	Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.	Ordinances adopted after September 11, 2006, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7.	This ordinance shall become effective 10 November 2008. 
Passed and adopted by the council this 10th day of November 2008. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the 10th day of November 2008. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Ellaville, Georgia, as adopted by 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 442), p. 3839. The sequence of sections within each article are the same as in the act comprising it. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body public and corporate under the name and style City of Ellaville, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporation boundaries. 
(a)	The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated as the case may be: "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Ellaville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of the state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law or by the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. Said powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city and to establish regulations to prohibit noise pollution; 
(2)	Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance, and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph; 
(3)	Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditures of money for the purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city; 
(4)	Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law; 
(5)	Building regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may be hereafter enacted; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes for fees; 
(6)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 or 32 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governments and entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)	Emergencies. To establish procedure for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary; to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)	Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(10)	Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(11)	Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(12)	General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(13)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)	Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)	Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)	Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(18)	Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)	Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)	Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)	Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to install and operate any of its utilities inside and outside its corporate limits in Schley County, Georgia; and to install and operate any of its utilities in adjoining counties pursuant to existing and future franchise agreements or utility supply contracts; 
(22)	Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)	Ordinance, rules and regulations. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(24)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(25)	Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulations and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(26)	Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and fire-fighting agency; 
(27)	Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(28)	Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(29)	Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(30)	Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(31)	Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts or impose taxes on public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission, and to own and operate its own franchise for the delivery of such services including cable television and related services; 
(32)	Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(33)	Retirement. To provide and maintain and dissolve a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(34)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(35)	Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)	Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)	Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use of firearms, to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxing or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvement; 
(39)	Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)	Taxes; other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)	Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(43)	Water fee. To levy a fee, charge, or water tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a water plant; to levy on those to whom water systems are made available a water service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the water; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a water connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; and 
(44)	Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter, and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)	The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. All elected officers shall commence service on January 1 following their respective elections. 
(b)	(1)	For purposes of electing members of the city council, the City of Ellaville is divided into four council districts. 
(2)	Except for the districts specified in paragraph (3) of this subsection, one member of the city council shall be elected from each district. 
(3)	Council District 1 shall consist of one election district with two numbered posts. Each person seeking election from such district shall designate the post for which such person seeks election. Such posts shall be designated as Post 1 and Post 2. 
(4)	The four council districts shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described and attached hereto and made a part of this Charter and further identified as client: Ellaville, type: Local, plan: Ellaville-import-2012. 
(5)	When used in such attachment, the terms "tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographic boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Separate numeric designations and a tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and described individual blocks within a block group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Ellaville which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included in that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Ellaville which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such non-contiguous part shall instead be included in that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(6)	No provisions of this Charter shall be construed to amend or modify the dates of election or the terms of office for any persons elected to such districts as newly described under this Charter. For purposes of electing members of the city council, the City of Ellaville is divided into four council districts. 
(c)	When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Ellaville which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Ellaville which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)	Those persons presently elected to office shall continue to serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified as provided by law. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 4212; Ord. of 1-14-2013) 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)	The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he or she shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; and each shall continue to reside therein during his or her period of service and be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. 
(b)	Candidates for Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 must at the time of qualification and during their term of service reside within the respective district which each seeks to represent. 
(c)	The mayor may reside anywhere within the City of Ellaville but must continue to reside within the City of Ellaville during that person's term, or that office shall become vacant. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 4212) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)	The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted, or the failure of any council member to continue to reside or the mayor's failure to reside within that member's respective district in the City of Ellaville. 
(b)	A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment of the mayor and city council, if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election, as provided for in Section 5.14 of this Charter and in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A., or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)	Failure to attend three consecutive regular meetings without cause shall result in the office of said mayor or council member to be deemed vacant and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and council members shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)	Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he or she was elected or during the period when he or she is seeking office following qualification. 
(b)	Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(c)	Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(d)	Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon or sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which he or she is personally interested. 
(e)	No city officer shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation, which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever with business dealings with the government body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign. 
(f)	No city official shall represent other private interest in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government. 
(g)	No officer of the city shall hold during his or her term as a city officer, a county-wide office except were specifically provided for by state law. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails to, [or], refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organization. 
The mayor and city council shall hold an organization meeting the first Monday of January following each municipal election. The oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (council member) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.19. - Meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or other applicable laws as may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Procedures. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. The rules of procedure adopted shall not expand or restrict any powers assigned to the mayor and council members by this Charter. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Voting. 
(a)	Four council members (including the mayor) shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of council members present at an official meeting shall be required for adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)	In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of council members holding office, then the remaining council members in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of majority of the remaining council members shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinances. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Ellaville" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)	An ordinance must be read at two consecutive regular meetings before being voted upon for adoption. 
Sec. 2.23. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. All other matters of business shall be considered in the form of a resolution. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergency. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describe the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three council members shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)	The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)	A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this Charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)	The city clerk shall authenticate by signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Ellaville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinance and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to code of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his or her compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. The city council is authorized, but not required, to appoint the same individual as both city manager and city clerk. If the council does so, such person shall perform the duties and exercise the powers for both positions as specified in this Charter and the ordinances of the city. 
(2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 254), p. 3850) 
Sec. 2.28. - Suspension or removal of city manager. 
(a)	The city council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)	The city council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)	Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, he or she may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; and 
(3)	If the manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)	The manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
(c)	The mayor and city council may for disciplinary purposes suspend the city manager with or without pay for a period of up to 30 days by affirmative vote of four council members. 
(d)	The mayor and city council may designate a person or persons to perform the functions and duties of the city manager during his or her absence, disability, or suspension. Vacancies in the office of city manager shall be filled by the mayor and city council as early as practicable, and, until such vacancy is filled, the mayor and city council shall have full powers to make a temporary appointment of a qualified person to perform the functions and duties of this office. 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	The city manager shall have the power to suspend or recommend removal, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, all city employees and administrative officers, except the city attorney, city judge, and members of the boards and commissions, who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. In suspending employees, the city manager shall have authority to do so without consent of the mayor and council but must keep the mayor and council advised of any actions deemed necessary. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)	The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)	The city manager shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(4)	The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and ordinances of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)	The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)	The city manager shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)	The city manager shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision; 
(8)	The city manager shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; 
(9)	The city manager shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council; 
(10)	The city manager shall supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the City of Ellaville and be the purchasing agent of materials and supplies for the city under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the mayor and city council; and 
(11)	The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2.30. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this Charter, or other inquiries and investigations initiated by action of the mayor and city council, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.31. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. He or she shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for at least 12 months immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his or her service. He or she shall forfeit his or her office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for council members. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for council members. The mayor shall be elected by the vote of the voters within all five districts. 
Sec. 2.32. - Mayor pro tempore. 
Beginning in January 2003, the post of mayor pro tempore shall rotate by council position each year starting with District 1, Post 1. However, as a prerequisite to being mayor pro tempore, the council person must have completed the training required by state law. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 242), p. 4212) 
Sec. 2.33. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)	Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)	Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)	Have the power to administer oaths and to make affidavits; 
(4)	Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)	Vote on matters before the city council only in event of a tie and be counted toward a quorum as any other council member; 
(6)	Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish; and 
(7)	Represent the city in intergovernmental relations. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - Department heads. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors or departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the department or agency. 
(e)	All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(e)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(f)	All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(g)	Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, an ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of his or her duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City Clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a council member. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
Sec. 3.14. - City accountant 
The city council shall appoint a certified public accountant who is a member of the peer review group to perform the duties of an independent auditor and to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city which shall be filed with the city. 
Sec. 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected city officials and the city manager are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)	The administration of the position, classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applicable of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)	Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)	Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Such personnel policies shall be recommended, directed, and administered by the city manager as personnel director of all employees of the city. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Ellaville. 
Sec. 4.11. - Judges. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 25 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)	Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)	Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of a majority of all of the members of the city council; otherwise, judges shall serve a term of one year, commencing and ending with the first meeting of the mayor and city council held in January. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor or other officer authorized to administer oaths, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 365 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. The maximum punishment for offenses committed under state law shall be those limits as established by general law. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited through procedures established by general law. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for [trial], the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisance and prosecution of traffic violations as set out in Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., including Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(j)	The judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to appoint on behalf of the city, a prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Said attorney shall be compensated by the city. Said judge shall also be authorized to employ a court reporter for each of the court proceedings over which he or she presides with said court reporter being compensated by the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Schley County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)	There shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)	There shall be elected the mayor and council members from Districts 1 and 3 at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats for Districts 2, 4, and 5 shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. The mayor and each council member shall serve four-year terms and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority. 
The candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. If no one receives a majority of votes cast, a run-off election must be held between the two candidates that received the highest vote count as provided in Georgia law. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall by ordinance prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)	The mayor, council members, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)	Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Schley County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; 
(2)	By an order of the Superior Court of Schley County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Ellaville; 
(3)	By recall pursuant to Georgia law; or 
(4)	Pursuant to the terms of general law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)	The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)	If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporation, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, water or water services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. The City of Ellaville shall have the power to file its tax fi. fas. in the Superior Court, State Court, or Magistrate Court of Schley County and to utilize processes of garnishment to collect these taxes. 
Sec. 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 90 days of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Adoption. 
(a)	The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 15 days prior to the start of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)	On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 90 days prior to the start of the fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget or the budget as amended by the mayor and city council. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than January 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year accompanied by his or her recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing; and 
(2)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall be [by] ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale of property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 60 days, before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)	Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)	The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act establishing a new Charter for the City of Ellaville in the County of Schley, approved March 30, 1992 (Ga. L. 1992, p. 6910), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.16. - City attorney; duty. 
It shall be the duty of the attorney of the City of Ellaville to submit this Act for approval pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended. 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 2002. 
Sec. 7.18. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Plan Name: ella3 Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Ellaville 
Redistricting Plan Components Report 
District 001 
Schley County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 1 
1110 1112 1113 1114 1115 1116 1117 1126 1127 1128 1129 1130 1131 
BG: 2 
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 
District 002 
Schley County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 2 
2006 2013 2014 2056 2057 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 2067 2069 
2072 2073 2079 2080 2081 2082 
District 003 
Schley County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 1 
1105 1106 1108 1109 1118 1119 1120 1123 1124 1125 
BG: 2 
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2042 2084 2086 2087 2088 
District 004 
Schley County 
Tract: 9601 
BG: 2 
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 
2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 
2055 2058 2059 2060 2061 2068 2085 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Ellaville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
(a)	Applicability. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction in this section and the definitions set out in section 1-3 shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)	Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)	The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)	In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)	All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(4)	Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions on the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and conventions. 
As used herein, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Ellaville, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means and refers to the Code of Ordinances of Ellaville, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either …or," or "neither…nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows; provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)	And. The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)	Or. The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	Either…or and neither…nor. The terms "either…or" and "neither…nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council, city council. The term "the council" or "city council" means the City Council of the City of Ellaville. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Schley County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department; board; agency. The name or title of any department, board, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the words "of the city of Ellaville, Georgia" were added thereto. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority; governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body"means the City of Ellaville, Georgia, and its designees. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. Health officer may also refer to any person designated as such by the city council. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Joint authority. Whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Ellaville, Georgia." 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to real estate, means and shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint interest or other fee interest in the whole or a part of such real estate. 
Person. The term "person" means and shall include firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, as well as natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
Public place : The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall include all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, numbers, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines; notes; references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or section of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, not any suit, prosecution or proceeding for violation of said ordinance pending at the time of the repeal. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the term "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readapted as a new Code by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Ellaville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Ellaville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations; violations as public nuisance. 
(a)	In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the city to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the city officer or employee. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by general law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding six months, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)	All sentences must be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rules, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(g)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)	All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(j)	In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)	If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with the laws of the state, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-154; additional penalties in certain traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)	Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; 
(6)	Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(7)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(8)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(9)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(10)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the city; 
(12)	Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)	Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(14)	Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(15)	Any resolution of the city not in conflict with this Code; 
and all such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Fee schedule; fees established by resolution. 
The city maintains a schedule of fees for permits, licenses, and other municipal charges. The amount of fees or charges imposed by the city including, but not limited to, those encompassed in the city's fee schedule, shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time, as the council deems necessary. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; municipal home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-19. - Composition; election; term; oath. 
The city council shall be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by the city Charter, from the four council districts established by the city Charter. The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Each member of the city council shall take oath as provided in the city Charter. 
Sec. 2-20. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)	Events creating vacancy. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified in the city Charter, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted, or the failure of any councilmember to continue to reside or the mayor's failure to reside within that member's respective district in the city. Failure to attend three consecutive regular meetings without cause shall result in the office of said mayor or councilmember to be deemed vacant and the vacancy shall be filled as provided herein. 
(b)	Filling vacancy. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment of the mayor and city council, if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election, as provided for in the city's Charter. 
Sec. 2-21. - Compensation. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 2-22. - Holding other office; conflicts of interest. 
(a)	Holding other city or county offices. Except as authorized by law, the mayor or any councilmember shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected or during the period when he is seeking office following qualification. No officer of the city shall hold, during his term as a city officer, a countywide office except were specifically provided for by state law. 
(b)	Personal interest. Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon or sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which he is personally interested. 
(c)	Representing private interests. No city official shall represent other private interest in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government. 
(d)	Violation; malfeasance. Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
Sec. 2-23. - Council meetings. 
(a)	Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the time and place specified by the city council. If a regularly scheduled meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, then said council meeting shall be held on the next business day following said holiday. 
(b)	Special meetings. Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of special meetings shall be served as provided in the city Charter. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	Open meetings. All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law. Notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by city Charter and state law. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; procedure for closing meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-24. - Voting; agenda; procedure. 
(a)	Quorum. Four councilmembers, including the mayor, shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting shall be accomplished in accordance with the city Charter. Except as otherwise provided in the city's Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present at an official meeting shall be required for adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. 
(b)	Voting. 
(1)	In any meeting of the city council, each councilmember present shall vote on each question before the city council unless a member of the city council is immediately and particularly interested in the question or unless a member of the city council is excused from voting by majority vote of the city council. A motion to excuse a member from voting must be made before the question is put to a vote, and such motion shall be decided without debate, except that the city councilmember making the motion may state briefly the reasons the motion was made. 
(2)	All questions to be decided by the city council shall be put by the presiding officer. The members of the city council shall vote viva voce, with a majority determining all questions, unless otherwise provided. The chairman or presiding officer, as the case may be, shall be authorized to vote on any question, but shall not be required to vote on any question unless there is a tie vote, in which case the chairperson shall cast the deciding vote unless he is otherwise disqualified from voting. 
(3)	Whenever it shall be requested by any one or more city councilmembers, the yeas and nays shall be recorded on any question put to the city council. 
(c)	Agenda. The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and council, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the council and to the public at some time during the week immediately prior to the meeting. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. This request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. A new subject that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. 
(d)	Repetitious motions. When a motion before the council is defeated, a motion regarding the same or a substantially similar subject may not be raised before the council for a period of six months from the date of its defeat. 
(e)	Limitations regarding public comment. All members of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the council meeting. Unless otherwise provided by law, any individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. 
(f)	Writing required; single topic; title. Every proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing. No ordinance or resolution shall be passed that refers to more than one subject matter or contains matter different from that expressed in the title except ordinances or resolutions adopting the annual operating and capital budgets and general codification and revision of ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners. 
(g)	Two readings required; exception. Except for emergency ordinances under subsection (h) of this section, no ordinance shall be adopted unless it has been read or presented in written form to the members of the board during at least two meetings held not less than one week apart. A resolution may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the board unanimously consents, an ordinance may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced. 
(h)	Emergency ordinances and resolutions. To meet a public emergency threatening life, health, property or public peace, the board may adopt emergency ordinances or resolutions; but such ordinances or resolutions may not be enacted to levy taxes; or to grant, renew or extend a franchise; or to regulate the rate charged for any public utility or service; or to authorize the borrowing of money. An emergency ordinance or resolution shall be in the form prescribed for ordinances or resolutions generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance or resolution and shall contain a declaration stating what emergency exists. An emergency ordinance or resolution may be adopted with or without amendment or may be rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of a majority of the board shall be required for its adoption. Such emergency ordinance or resolution shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance or resolution shall automatically stand repealed, unless otherwise provided, on the 31st day following the date on which it was adopted; but, if the emergency still exists, the automatic repeal of the ordinance or resolution shall not prevent its reenactment in the manner provided in this subsection. An emergency ordinance or resolution may also be repealed in the same manner as provided for the adoption of an emergency ordinance or resolution in this subsection. 
(i)	Public hearings regarding zoning issues. Public hearings regarding zoning shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 and O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and shall constitute an exception to the provisions of this section that conflict with the cited statutes. 
(j)	Rules of procedure. Additional rules of procedure for city council meetings shall be as established from time to time by the city council or, in the event of conflict and absent an applicable rule, the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-25. - Minutes of meetings. 
(a)	Required; open to public. A summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting must be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of a meeting. The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting and such records shall be open to public inspection once approved as official by the council, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. 
(b)	Minimum contents of minutes. Minutes must, as a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote the name of each person voting for or against a proposal must be recorded. In all other cases, it shall be presumed that the action taken was approved by each person in attendance, unless the minutes reflect the name of the persons voting against the proposal or abstaining. 
Sec. 2-26. - Order of business. 
All regular council meetings shall follow an order of business established by the council from time to time. 
Sec. 2-27. - Duty of clerk regarding minutes and ordinances. 
The clerk shall: 
(1)	Keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the city council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a book or register kept for that purpose and as required by the city Charter; 
(2)	Insert or cause to be inserted all amendments or ordinances that indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of the city's Code of Ordinances when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form; and 
(3)	Extract or cause to be extracted from the Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-28. - Authority of council to inquire and investigate. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Secs. 2-29—2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to fix salaries of and provide benefits for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-60. - Oath and bond required. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions, and shall take such prescribed oath of office, as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 2-61. - Removal of officers. 
Any appointed officer may be removed from office on the grounds and through the procedure provided by the city Charter. 
Sec. 2-62. - Check-signing policy. 
(a)	Check-signing authority shall reside in the following city officials: 
(1)	Mayor; 
(2)	Mayor protem; 
(3)	Former mayor protem. 
(b)	Signing of checks shall be authorized as follows: 
(1)	All city-issued checks will require a minimum of two signatures; 
(2)	Primary signers on the accounts will be the mayor and mayor protem; 
(3)	Individuals shall not be a signatory for a check to which he or she is the payee; 
(4)	In the absence of an authorized signer, the authorized signer may grant, in writing, another city councilor the authorization in their absence for check signing purposes; 
(5)	The supporting data for each check/voucher shall be available for each check for the signer to review at the time of signing; 
(6)	The policy rescinds all previous authorization and shall become effective upon this adoption. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(1)) 
Secs. 2-63—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-81. - Appointment; compensation; combined offices. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2-82. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by this Code or under the city Charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	The city manager shall have the power to suspend or recommend removal, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, all city employees and administrative officers, except the city attorney, city judge, and members of the boards and commissions, who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. In suspending employees, the city manager shall have authority to do so without consent of the mayor and council but must keep the mayor and council advised of any actions deemed necessary. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)	The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Code or by law; 
(3)	The city manager shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(4)	The city manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Code, and provisions of the city Charter, and subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)	The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)	The city manager shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)	The city manager shall make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his direction and supervision; 
(8)	The city manager shall keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable; 
(9)	The city manager shall perform other such duties as are specified in this Code, the city Charter, or as may be required from time to time by the city council; and 
(10)	The city manager shall supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the city and be the purchasing agent of materials and supplies for the city under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2-83. - Suspension or removal. 
The city manager may be suspended or removed as provided by the city Charter. 
Sec. 2-84. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2-28, or other inquiries and investigations initiated by action of the mayor and city council, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Secs. 2-85—2-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-112. - Election; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for at least 12 months immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside in the city during the period of his service. He shall forfeit his office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2-113. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The post of mayor pro tempore shall rotate by council position each year as provided by the city Charter; however, as a prerequisite to being mayor pro tempore, the councilperson must have completed the training required by state law. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. 
Sec. 2-114. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)	Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)	Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)	Have the power to administer oaths and to make affidavits; 
(4)	Sign, as a matter of course, on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)	Vote on matters before the city council only in the event of a tie and be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(6)	Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish; and 
(7)	Represent the city in intergovernmental relations. 
Secs. 2-115—2-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OTHER CITY OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-142. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Code, the city Charter, or state law, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
Sec. 2-143. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
Sec. 2-144. - City accountant. 
The city council shall appoint a certified public accountant, who is a member of the peer review group, to perform the duties of an independent auditor and to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city, which shall be filed with the city. 
Secs. 2-145—2-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NEPOTISM 

Sec. 2-172. - Applicability. 
This division applies to all individuals employed by the city, except employees who have held their current positions on and prior to January 1, 2003. This division is in no way to be construed to apply to elected officials. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-173. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Relative includes: 
(1)	Parent; 
(2)	Sibling; 
(3)	Child; 
(4)	Step relative of the preceding three; 
(5)	Spouse; 
(6)	Adopted or foster child; 
(7)	Mother or father-in-law; 
(8)	Daughter or son-in-law; 
(9)	Grandparent; 
(10)	Grandchild; 
(11)	Aunt or uncle; 
(12)	Niece or nephew; 
(13)	First cousin. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-174. - Hiring of certain persons prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, relatives of city employees will not be hired if: 
(1)	One member would have the authority or be in a position to supervise, hire, remove or discipline the other; 
(2)	One member would be responsible for auditing or evaluating the work of the other; or 
(3)	Other circumstances exist which would place the relatives in a situation of actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict between the city's interest and their own. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 2-175. - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the nepotism policy stated in this division shall be made only upon recommendation of the city manager and approval by the city council. If a department wishes to hire an employee's relative, the department director must submit a written request to the city manager. The city manager shall make a recommendation to the city council. The applicant may be hired only upon final approval by the city council. 
Sec. 2-176. - Relationship occurring during employment. 
(a)	Relationship not violating this division. When a relationship included in the definition of the term "relative" arises between city employees during employment, the two employees may remain in their positions, provided that continued employment does not violate this division. 
(b)	Relationship violating this division; transfer or separation. If the relationship violates this division, the city will attempt to arrange a transfer or change in position for one or both employees. If a suitable transfer in position is not available, one of the employees will be separated from city service. 
(c)	Procedure; final determination. Every attempt will be made to effect transfer or separation on the basis of agreement between the employees involved and the city. If a mutual agreement is unattainable, the city manager will determine, in the city's best interest, the employee to be transferred or separated. The city manager's determination as to whether a situation of conflict exists and the appropriate resolution of the conflict shall be final. 
Secs. 2-177—2-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-206. - Department heads. 
There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the department or agency. Department heads shall be appointed as provided by the city Charter. They shall be under the direct supervision of the city manager. 
Sec. 2-207. - Boards. 
The city council shall establish such boards as it deems necessary or advisable, in accordance with the procedure provided by the city Charter. Except as otherwise provided by this Code or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code or the city Charter, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of his duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Secs. 2-208—2-237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-238. - Established. 
The city council, in order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city that will, in accordance with existing and future needs best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, has established the planning commission. 
Sec. 2-239. - Composition; term; compensation. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and city council. The terms of the members shall be for three years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
Sec. 2-240. - Chairperson; secretary. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. 
Sec. 2-241. - Rules of procedure; meetings. 
The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2-242. - Personnel; contracts; finances. 
The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the Middle Flint Area Planning and Development Commission, city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2-243. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities conferred upon it by the Georgia Constitution, state statute, the city Charter, this Code, and as time to time lawfully extended by ordinance of the city council. 
Secs. 2-244—2-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COUNTY RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-265. - Established. 
The city, in cooperation with the county board of commissioners of roads and revenues, has established the county recreation commission. 
State Law reference— Authority for joint recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-4. 
Sec. 2-266. - Composition; appointment; compensation. 
The recreation commission shall consist of seven persons serving without pay appointed from the two local governing bodies. The county shall appoint persons to fill the positions identified as Post I, Post III, and Post V. The city shall appoint persons to fill the positions identified as Post II and Post IV. 
Sec. 2-267. - Term of office; vacancies. 
The term of office for each commission member shall be five years, or until his successors are appointed. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor or chairperson of the county governing body, depending on the post being filled. The appointment for a vacancy shall be for the remaining term of the post filled. 
Sec. 2-268. - Officers. 
The commission shall elect annually a chairperson and such other officers as the commission deems necessary. 
Sec. 2-269. - Bylaws, rules, and regulations. 
The recreation commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city. 
Sec. 2-270. - Powers and duties. 
The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers, and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
Sec. 2-271. - Recreation director; other personnel. 
The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as recreation director who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
Sec. 2-272. - Budget; annual report. 
Annually, the recreation commission shall submit an annual budget to the city and the county governing authorities for approval. The recreation commission shall make an annual report to the city and such other reports as from time to time may be requested. 
Sec. 2-273. - Donations. 
In addition to the funds appropriated by the governing body, the commission may accept any grant or devise of real estate or any gift or bequest of money or other personal property or any donation to the applied principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds, or recreation purposes, but if the acceptance thereof for such purposes will subject the governing body to additional expense for improvements, maintenance, or renewal, the acceptance of any grant or devise of real estate shall be subject to the approval of the governing bodies. Money received for such purposes, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the gift or bequest, shall be deposited in the funds of the recreation commission. 
Sec. 2-274. - Fees for recreational activities. 
The commission may also charge a nominal fee for a variety of activities, which may not be included in the original budget request. All monies received by appropriation or otherwise shall be deposited to the account of the recreation commission. 
Sec. 2-275. - Liability of city. 
The city shall not be liable for accidents that occur through the conducting of the recreation program. 
Secs. 2-276—2-298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-299. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
Secs. 2-300—2-316. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGETS AND AUDITS 

Sec. 2-317. - Annual operating budget. 
(a)	Time for submission. On or before August 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as may be deemed pertinent. 
(b)	Filing; open for public inspection. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 2-318. - Amendment to budget. 
The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Code and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
Sec. 2-319. - Adoption of operating budget; appropriations ordinance. 
The city council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 15 days prior to the start of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance. 
Sec. 2-320. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of the city. 
Sec. 2-321. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 2-322. - Annual capital improvements budget. 
On or before August 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget or the budget as amended by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2-323. - Adoption and amendment of capital improvements budget. 
The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than January 31 of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations were made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year accompanied by his recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-324. - Annual audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Code. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Secs. 2-325—2-351. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACTING AND PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-352. - Contract requirements. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing and made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 2-353. - Purchasing agent. 
(a)	Office; term; assignment. There is hereby created the office of purchasing agent for the city. The term of the office shall be for an indefinite period or until a successor is appointed and installed. Unless otherwise provided by the council, the city manager shall fill the position of purchasing agent. 
(b)	Duties. The duties of the purchasing agent shall be to ensure that all the steps of the purchasing policies and procedures, as prescribed in this division, are followed and completed; that the prices for items ordered are the best that can be obtained in the local market or elsewhere; that the necessary forms and reports are prepared and filed; and such other duties as may be necessary to ensure efficient purchasing practices or responsibilities as may be prescribed by the mayor or the city council, or both. 
(c)	Purchase requisition forms; mandatory procedure. All requests for purchases will be submitted to the purchasing agent on a requisition form. All nonemergency requisitions shall be submitted not less than two weeks before the service or item is required. No officer or employee of the city shall handle purchasing operations for any materials or services except through the purchasing agent; no bid shall be honored or awarded if this method is not followed. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the city who ignores proper purchasing procedures and does not follow the policies prescribed by this division. 
(d)	Open records; compliance with procedure. It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing agent to make all purchases in accordance with the provisions of this division. Record of all bids for goods, services or materials of any kind or character purchased by the city shall be subject to inspection at any time by the public. 
Sec. 2-354. - General purchasing procedures. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, and subject to the local preference provided in this division, the following provisions shall control all purchases made by the city: 
(1)	Purchases of property or services valued at $3,000.00 or less, shall be negotiated, authorized and executed as directed by the city manager and approved by the city council; provided, however, that the maximum amount of any one purchase approved by department heads and the purchasing agent will not exceed the listed monetary values: 

 
(2)	Purchases of property or services valued at $3,001.00 or more shall be approved by resolution of the mayor and council and shall be negotiated and authorized only after the purchasing agent has solicited three or more competitive bids, with the exception of emergency purchases as provided herein. 
(3)	Whenever an item is purchased under a state contract, such purchase is exempt from the bid requirements of this section; that is, acceptance is at the state price and terms from the vendor who has been awarded the contract for purchase by the state as to the item being purchased for the year in which the item is being purchased. 
(4)	Any sole source purchase of $2,500.00 or more must be approved by the city council, except for emergency purchases as provided herein. 
(5)	All emergency purchases of goods and services requiring the expenditure of $2,500.00 or more shall be approved by the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem, and three councilmembers. If necessary, the purchasing division may secure permission of the mayor, or mayor pro tem, and three councilmembers by telephone. 
(6)	All purchases of professional services shall be exempt from the bid requirements of this section unless otherwise directed by the mayor and council. Professional services means those services provided by persons defined by the laws of the state to be professionals (accountants, clergy, physicians, engineers, lawyers, dentists, etc.), or any other services (in that provision of these services involves extended analysis; exercising discretion and independent judgment in their performance; and an advanced and specialized type of knowledge, expertise, or training customarily acquired either by prolonged course of study or equivalent experience in the field or both). 
Sec. 2-355. - Determination of selected bidder. 
In determining the most responsible bidder, in addition to price, the following shall be considered: 
(1)	The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract; 
(2)	Whether the bidder can perform the contract within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)	The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)	The quality of performance under previous contracts; 
(5)	The previous compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract; 
(6)	Sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract and provide the service; 
(7)	The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)	The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the contract under consideration; 
(9)	The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; 
(10)	The local preference provided in this division; and 
(11)	Such other factors as appear to be pertinent to either the bid or the contract under all of the circumstances involved. 
Sec. 2-356. - Policy of nondiscrimination. 
In the award of contracts for the sale or purchase of goods or services, the city shall not discriminate against minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses or handicapped-owned businesses. 
Sec. 2-357. - Preference to state suppliers. 
In the purchase of, and in contracting for, any city supplies, materials, equipment, and printing, and in the award of contracts following competitive bidding, the city's purchasing agent shall give preference as far as may be reasonable and practicable, and not exceeding five percent of the purchase amount in additional costs, to such materials, supplies, equipment, and printing as may be manufactured or produced in this state. It is the intention of this section that the city use, insofar as is practicable, state products and state labor; provided, however, that in giving such preference, no sacrifice or loss in price or quality shall be permitted. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-60. 
Secs. 2-358—2-387. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-388. - Intent and policy. 
It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, the city has adopted a code of ethics applicable to all city officials. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 2-389. - Purpose. 
This article has the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)	To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city; 
(3)	To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners affecting the city; and 
(4)	To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 2-390. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions, and committee members. The provisions of this article shall not apply with regard to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 2-391. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official or official , unless other expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges, including substitute judges, city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, deputy city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. The term "city official," unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official that would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a councilmember in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions incidental to the extent that the councilmember would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity if: 
(1)	The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)	Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)	The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property that is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 2-392. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this policy is subject to: 
(1)	Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member; 
(2)	A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member; 
(3)	Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
(b)	Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1-9) 
Sec. 2-393. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)	No councilmember or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)	No councilmember or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)	No councilmember or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)	No councilmember or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)	No councilmember or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission who has a substantial interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)	All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)	No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair the judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)	If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)	No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)	No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
Sec. 2-394. - Conflicts of interest. 
A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
State Law reference— Voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Sec. 2-395. - Exemptions. 
This code of ethics shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
Chapter 6 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed; however, it is recognized that such regulation cannot be de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this chapter represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the city's neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means any business or establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means any restaurant, lounge, private club, night club, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means a business that consists of one or more of the following: an adult bookstore, an adult business, an adult dancing establishment, an adult motion picture theater, an adult mini-motion picture theater, an adult hotel or motel, an adult motion picture arcade, an adult video store, or an escort bureau. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in videotapes, movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section thereof, comprising 20 percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than 20 percent of its net sales from videotapes, movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order, united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies. 
Convicted shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere. 
Employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee and work at any licensed premises mean all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the licensed premises or elsewhere. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services mean any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnishes, or offers to furnish, names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person has not been convicted of a drug-related crime, an alcohol-related felony, a sex-related crime, or a crime of moral turpitude in the past five years. 
Independent contractors means employees of adult entertainment establishments and they shall be licensed as employees regardless of the type of business relationship with the owner or licensee of the adult entertainment establishment. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Parcel of land means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Partial nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult entertainment establishment, as defined herein, partially nude, but at a minimum with the human male or female genitals, pubic area and buttocks and all of the nipples of the breasts of a female being at least shielded and covered by a fully opaque covering. 
Public indecency , as it relates to an adult dancing establishment, means: 
(1)	Engaging in sexual intercourse; 
(2)	Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)	Engaging in a state of total nudity as opposed to partial nudity; 
(4)	Fondling the genitals of oneself or another person; or 
(5)	Dancing with the male genitals covered, but in a discernible turgid state. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)	Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Such activities shall be deemed to be acts of public indecency under the terms of this chapter. 
Total nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult dancing establishment, as herein defined, without the protection or benefit of the minimal coverings required for partial nude dancing. 
Sec. 6-3. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoining thereof, in the manner provided by law. The city shall further be authorized to take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate such nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any permit granted hereunder. 
Secs. 6-4—6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-25. - Limitation on number of licenses issued. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 96 S.Ct. 2440, 49 L.Ed.2d 310 (1976). 
(Ord. of 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 6-26. - License required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or operate in or upon any premises within the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter, without a license to do so. 
(b)	No license so issued shall condone or authorize, or be deemed to condone or authorize, any activity if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state, federal, or municipal law. Any such license must be currently valid or the licensee shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required therefor under this chapter. 
Sec. 6-27. - Application for license. 
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment business shall make application to the city chief of police. Prior to submitting such application, the nonrefundable fee, established by this article, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of the investigations and reports required by this article. Upon payment thereof, the city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)	The application for such a license shall not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment business until the approval of the application as herein provided. 
Sec. 6-28. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain, at a minimum, the following information. 
(1)	The applicant's full name, social security number, and date of birth. 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(4)	The business, occupation and employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)	The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous businesses in this or any other city, state or territory, has had any license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, all states or other jurisdictions in which the applicant is authorized to do business (including written evidence of such authorizations), and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. 
(7)	If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. 
(8)	If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership. 
(9)	If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to corporations shall apply to the corporate partner. 
(10)	The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one or more of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)	Whether the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime evidencing a lack of good moral character, as defined in this chapter, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction where the crime or act occurred, and any disposition thereof, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of any court-imposed sentence have been fully completed. 
(12)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of all trade name documents properly recorded as required by law. 
(13)	If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report to the Georgia Secretary of State. 
(14)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not and will not benefit financially in any way from the operation of the business if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this section for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(15)	The address of the premises to be licensed. 
(16)	Whether the premises are owned or rented by the applicant. 
(17)	A plat by a registered surveyor, licensed by the state, showing that the location of the proposed premises is in accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter 94, zoning. 
(18)	Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct: 
a.	If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
b.	If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official of such organization or association; 
(19)	In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number and date of birth of all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the business that is applying for the license, and any other matter reasonably required by the chief of police. 
Sec. 6-29. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership, corporation, or other entity, shall personally appear at the city police department, before the chief of police, or his designee, and produce proof that the nonrefundable application fee, established by this article, has been paid, and shall also present the completed license application containing the required information to the chief or his designee. 
Sec. 6-30. - Application; investigation; recommendations. 
(a)	The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief shall report his findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council, which shall consider the application within 30 days of receipt of the report from the chief. 
(b)	After a hearing on the application, at which any interested persons present may be heard, the mayor and city council shall grant or deny the permit at its next regular meeting; but the mayor and city council may only recommend the granting of such permit if it finds: 
(1)	The required application fee has been paid. 
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in connection with the investigation of his application. 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, have not been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, in a court of competent jurisdiction to an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or have been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, of an attempt to commit any of the aforementioned offenses, or convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in any other state as to an offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been the same or substantially the same offense as one or more of the stated offenses. 
(6)	The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause in this city or in any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to either the date of the application or the date of the granting of the application. 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, and location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy under the law of this state and the articles of this city. 
(8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)	That neither the applicant, nor any of the applicant's employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, or managers, has within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities defined herein to occur in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, nor has such applicant or other persons knowingly allowed or permitted the proposed licensed premises to be used as a place in which solicitations for any of the specified sexual activities occurred within the said time period. 
(10)	That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person actually on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)	That the proposed premises shall not be located at any location not authorized by this article or by chapter 94, zoning. 
(12)	That the grant of such license will not result in a violation of this article or any other article or regulation of the city, or of any laws, rules or regulations of the state, or the United States. 
(13)	Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(14)	That all of the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to this section, have been met by the applicant. 
(c)	All hearings regarding such application shall be open to the public and advertised in the legal organ of the county as required by law. 
Sec. 6-31. - Additional license requirements. 
(a)	The licensee shall maintain with the city police department at all times a written statement of the name, address, and phone number of the manager or assistant manager in charge of the licensed premises and there shall at all times be a manager in charge and on the premises during operating hours. 
(b)	Each licensee shall have a continuing obligation to comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	The applicant may be required to appear at any hearing on the issue of the grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of the requested license governed by this article. 
Sec. 6-32. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
Subject to the other requirements of this chapter, no license authorized by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes, including ad valorem taxes, for a business at that location; 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this chapter; 
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or shareholders are not of good moral character as defined in this chapter; 
(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character as defined in this chapter; 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financial in whole or in part by, any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this chapter; 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
Sec. 6-33. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments licenses shall be as established by this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to the year for which such license is requested. 
Sec. 6-34. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such licensee and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this article. 
Sec. 6-35. - Change of name. 
(a)	No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment business under any name other than the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(b)	Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter, and all other articles, rules and regulations of the city. 
Sec. 6-36. - Display of license. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
Sec. 6-37. - Annual report. 
No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
Sec. 6-38. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)	After notice and hearing, the chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license previously granted hereunder. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke a license, the chief of police shall give written notification to the licensee of such action. 
(b)	The notice shall contain a specification of the violation upon which such suspension or revocation is based and shall be served upon the licensee, by registered mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The licensee shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(c)	The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of the occurrence of any one or more of the following: 
(1)	A licensee provided false or misleading information in the original or subsequent application process; 
(2)	A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)	A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an article of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state or of the United States to occur on the premises; 
(4)	A licensee has violated any provision of this article; 
(5)	A licensee has been convicted, during the license period, of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state, the city, or the United States regarding an offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter when such offense would serve to prohibit the licensee from obtaining a permit under this article; 
(6)	A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due the city under this article or any other license or occupational taxation article of the city. 
(d)	In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the sound discretion of the chief of police; provided, however, that the licensee shall be authorized to continue his business operations until the date of any hearing scheduled in accordance with this article. 
(e)	No licensee or other applicant may apply for a license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing or investigation conducted by the chief of police, in connection with a possible suspension or revocation of a license issued hereunder, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of any suspension or revocation. 
(f)	In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the licensee may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date that the licensee receives written notification of the decision of the chief of police. 
(g)	The written notification shall be mailed to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council within 45 days after the filing of the notice of appeal by the applicant. 
(h)	After hearing by the city council, the city council may take such action as it finds warranted from the evidence submitted to it, including, but not limited to, the affirming of the action of the chief of police, the reversal of such action, or the imposition of modified sanctions upon the licensee. 
Sec. 6-39. - License fees. 
(a)	Application and renewal fees shall be paid to the city clerk upon application or renewal, as the case may be. The amount of the fees shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(b)	Any licensee shall also be subject to all business license fees and occupational taxes imposed by the city pursuant to chapter 22. 
Secs. 6-40—6-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-68. - Qualifications. 
Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be at least 21 years of age. Any applicant for employment who has been previously convicted within the preceding five years of a sex-related crime, a drug-related crime, or an alcohol-related felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude shall not be eligible for employment as an adult entertainment establishment employee, and any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, drug-related crime, or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work at any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered as part of a court-ordered sentence. 
Sec. 6-69. - Approval for employment. 
Before any person may be employed at a licensed premises by a licensee hereunder, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in section 6-68. The city shall have 45 days to review and investigate the application submitted by the employee. If the employee is found to be qualified for such employment by the terms of this article, the chief of police shall grant approval of the employment. Upon approval, the employee may be employed by the licensee. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief administrative officer of the city for a hearing. The decision of the chief administrative officer after hearing the appeal shall be final. 
Sec. 6-70. - Investigation fee. 
An investigation fee in the amount established by the city council, or a receipt from the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed, shall accompany the notice of intended employment submitted to the chief of police. 
Sec. 6-71. - Retention of employee records. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed therein. 
Sec. 6-72. - Employment of minors prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
Secs. 6-73—6-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREMISES, LOCATION, AND BUSINESS HOURS 

Sec. 6-103. - Advertising and posting. 
The premises for which the license herein is sought either as an initial license or a renewal thereof, shall be posted with a notice in a form prescribed by the city chief administrative officer for at least 21 days prior to any hearing on such application. In addition, a newspaper advertisement shall be published in the county legal organ in a form prescribed by the city chief administrative officer at least two times during the ten days prior to any hearing on such license application or renewal. The posted notice and newspaper advertisements shall notify all interested persons of the date, time, location and purpose of the hearing on such application. 
Sec. 6-104. - Lighting. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(b)	Required. All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. 
Sec. 6-105. - Premises open for inspection. 
The licensed premises shall be open at any and all reasonable times for inspection by the city to establish and ensure compliance with this article. 
Sec. 6-106. - Lot size; road frontage; zoning. 
Adult entertainment establishment businesses shall be located only in a commercial zoning district as now or hereafter defined by the city's zoning articles and regulations on a parcel of property not less than three acres in size, with no less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
Sec. 6-107. - Proximity to other buildings and facilities. 
No adult entertainment establishment business shall be located: 
(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; 
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building owned or occupied by such government, library, civic center, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
Sec. 6-108. - Measurements of distance. 
For the purpose of this article, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
Sec. 6-109. - Permitted hours of operation. 
All adult entertainment establishments shall be closed between 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day. They shall also be closed every Sunday and on Christmas Day. 
Secs. 6-110—6-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROHIBITED ACTS AND PERFORMANCES 

Sec. 6-132. - Nude dancing; public indecency. 
Total nude dancing, appearing nude or dancing involving acts of public indecency as defined by this chapter are hereby prohibited in any adult dancing establishment. Any other dancing or acts of public indecency prohibited by other applicable laws of the state or articles of the city as now or hereinafter enacted, or the violation of any of the other criminal laws of the state or of the city, are likewise prohibited. 
Sec. 6-133. - Touching of employees or patrons. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensed employee shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any adult entertainment establishment employee on the licensed premises. 
Sec. 6-134. - Dancing platform required; distance from patrons. 
All dancing by an employee at an adult dancing establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
Sec. 6-135. - Sexual activities. 
No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall allow or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in any of the following sexual activities: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)	Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Sec. 6-136. - Gratuities prohibited. 
No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
Sec. 6-137. - Alcohol prohibited. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall be authorized to serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption or possession of any beer, wine, or other intoxicating liquor or controlled substances upon the premises of the licensee, and no license for the sale of beer, wine, or other intoxicating liquor may be issued by the city to an adult entertainment establishment as herein defined. 
State Law reference— Certain nude and sexual conduct prohibited on premises licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq. 
Secs. 6-138—6-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINORS 

Sec. 6-158. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors into a licensed premises. 
Sec. 6-159. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale from an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment enterprise. 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to license and regulate alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-7; alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing alcohol, however sold, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, malt beverages, wines, and spirituous liquors. 
Malt beverage means any fermented beverage made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage, containing any amount of alcohol. 
Manager means any person who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter. 
Mixed drink means any distilled spirits or spirituous liquors served for consumption on the premises by the drink that may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. Any sales of mixed drinks in the city must be approved by referendum as required by state law. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. 
Owner means any person, partner or stockholder owning any percentage of a business. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license. 
Restaurant means any establishment which is licensed under this chapter, which establishment derives at least 30 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals and which is publicly held out as a place where hot meals are prepared and served at least five days a week, excluding holidays. 
Spirituous liquors or distilled spirits means all beverages containing alcohol obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Wine means any wine, fortified or unfortified, produced either within or without the state and containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Applicability of and conflict with state law. 
(a)	Governing law. The Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., wherever applicable to municipalities, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(b)	Conflict of laws. Any provisions of this chapter in conflict with the cited state code, shall be invalid and the state code section dealing with the same subjects shall control. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Activity declared a privilege. 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege, and not a right, and the issuance of a license hereunder shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1. 
Sec. 10-4. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or the chief's agents to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Familiarity and compliance with chapter. 
Any licensee hereunder shall ensure that the licensee and all employees of the licensee are advised of and comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-53) 
Sec. 10-6. - Availability of telephone. 
Every premises licensed hereunder must have a telephone and have such telephone available during the hours of operation. Failure to have a telephone shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of all licenses. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-57(d)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Illegal drugs or narcotics. 
For every license issued pursuant to this chapter, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, or licensee's agent or employee to report to the police department any usage or possession of illegal drugs or narcotics on a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 10-57(e)) 
Secs. 10-8—10-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate manufacture, distribution, and package sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt regulations and determine location, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; local licenses for sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110; local licenses regarding malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-42; local licenses for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 10-33. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail in the city any alcoholic beverage without having the required alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-30) 
State Law reference— Authority for local licensure generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 10-34. - Licenses for nonprofit organizations. 
Any patriotic organization, charitable organization, or fraternal organization that has been in operation in the city for a period of five years under a national or state charter and that is nonprofit, in that the individual members do not receive any dividends or share in the profits, shall be licensed in order to make retail sales of spirituous liquors to its members. No license shall be issued unless the organization is approved by the city for the issuance of such license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-31(a)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Bona fide private clubs. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide club as may be fixed for the person by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the city council of the organization out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities that are added to charges under club regulation are not considered to be from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	License and city approval required. Any bona fide private club that is nonprofit, in that the individual members do not receive any dividends or share in the profits, shall be licensed in order to make retail sales of spirituous liquors to its members. No license shall be issued unless the club is approved by the city for the issuance of the license. 
(c)	Qualifications for licensure. To qualify for licensure, the bona fide private club must be a nonprofit corporation or association, organized under the laws of this state, that: 
(1)	Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)	Has at least 50 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)	Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; 
(4)	Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages, beyond a fixed salary. 
(d)	Preexisting clubs. However, any private club previously holding any type of alcoholic beverage license issued by the city at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be required to meet all of the criteria set out for a bona fide private club. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-31(b)-(c)) 
State Law reference— Authority for local regulation and licensing of private clubs for sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-40. 
Sec. 10-36. - Qualification of licensee. 
No alcoholic beverage license required by the provisions of this article shall be issued: 
(1)	Residency; exception. To any person, unless the person, or the person's manager actually in charge of the operation of the business, is a resident of the county and a citizen of the United States or has designated a resident of the city who is responsible for any matter relating to the license; provided, however, that where the applicant is a corporation, incorporated pursuant to the laws of the state or authorized to do business in the state, that has an alcoholic beverage license or licenses presently in force and issued by another municipality, the county residency requirement shall not apply if the corporation appoints its local store manager or manager as an additional agent and representative of the corporation. 
(2)	Good moral character and reputation. To a person who, in the opinion and judgment of the city council, is not of good moral character and reputation in the community in which the person resides. 
(3)	Fitness for conduct of business. To a person who by reason of reputation, character or mental or physical capacity is not, in the judgment of the city council, a fit or qualified person to conduct such a business. 
(4)	Criminal convictions related to alcohol. To a person found by the city council to have been guilty of the violation of any federal, state or local law or regulation respecting the manufacture, possession or sale of any alcoholic beverage, or who has forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(5)	Other criminal convictions. When the applicant, or any employee of the applicant has been convicted of a felony or of a violation of the laws or regulations of any state or political subdivision relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages or has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving the use of firearms, theft, violence or a crime of moral turpitude. The forfeiture of bond or collateral or a plea of nolo contendere or a plea of guilty shall be considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. 
(6)	Applicability to partnerships. To a partnership, if any member of the partnership is disqualified under this section. 
(7)	Applicability to corporations. To a corporation, if any officer, stockholder, manager or director thereof would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than nonresidence in this county. 
(8)	Managers and agents. To a person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications as required of the license holder. 
(9)	Previously licensed persons. To a person who is the previous holder of an alcoholic beverage license and is, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, an unfit person to have a license because of the manner in which the person conducted business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any laws or regulations relating to the business. 
(10)	Unsuitable location. For a location: 
a.	Not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties or on the neighborhood. 
b.	Within an area where, in the judgment of the city council, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
c.	At which the operation of the proposed establishment would be in violation of the zoning laws of the city. 
d.	At which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been denied, revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at the location indicate that it is not in the best interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at the location. 
e.	That fails to meet state and local fire and health codes. 
f.	Within 300 feet of a location at which an alcoholic beverage license is in effect, except for locations that already have a bona fide private club license and except for locations operated as a hotel as hereinafter defined; provided, however, that this subsection shall only apply to applicants for an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, the term "hotel" shall mean a building, or a portion of a building, including any motel, motor hotel, auto court or inn, containing guestrooms, which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, and which serves food, as part of its business, to guests or to members of the general public on a daily basis. 
(11)	License would violate law. When the granting of the license would constitute a violation of state law or regulation. 
(12)	Past due alcoholic beverage fees. To any person who has past due alcoholic beverage fees owed to the city. 
(13)	False statements. To any person who has made any false statement on an application for a license under this article, or any previous application for a license under this article. 
(14)	Family relationship. To any person to which the applicant, or any partner, officer, stockholder or director of the applicant is related within the first degree of consanguinity and affinity as computed according to the canon law, to any person who has been previously denied a license or had a license revoked or suspended, if the previous applicant or holder of a license has any ownership interest in the applicant's business. 
(15)	Managers of former licensees. To a person who was a manager of a previous license holder, whose license was denied, revoked or suspended, if the person was the manager of the license holder at the time that any act occurred which formed the basis for the denial, revocation or suspension. 
(16)	License previously denied. To a person who has previously had a license denied, revoked or suspended or was a partner, officer, director or stockholder of a previous license holder, whose license was denied, revoked or suspended. 
(17)	Ineligibility of owner, lessor, or lessee. To an owner, lessor or lessee of the premises where the business is to be located, where an owner, lessor or lessee of the premises or any partner, officer, stockholder or director of an owner, lessor or lessee of the premises where the business is to be located would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than nonresidency in this county. 
(18)	Sanitary facilities. For premises not containing sanitary facilities as required by city code. 
(19)	Prior application denied. To any person or entity for any location with respect to which a prior application has been submitted and denied, withdrawn or otherwise disposed of within the preceding 30 days. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, §§ 3-32, 10-33) 
State Law reference— Local discretion and due process as to grant or suspension of licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 10-37. - Application. 
Applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be made to the city clerk and treasurer in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk and treasurer. They shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit. All applications shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)	Individual identification. The name, age and address of the applicant in case of an individual; in case of a partnership, the general partners or persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, their ages and addresses; in the case of a corporation, the names, ages and addresses of all the officers and stockholders. 
(2)	Business location. The location and description of the premises or place of business that is to be operated under the license. 
(3)	Previous applications. A statement of whether the applicant or any member of the partnership, or any officer or stockholder of the corporation, has made application at any previous time for any alcoholic beverage license in the city, and the disposition of the application. 
(4)	Criminal history. Whether any of the persons signing the application, or if a corporation, any of the officers or stockholders, have ever been convicted of a crime other than for violation of traffic laws. 
(5)	Prior license revocation. Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reason therefor. 
(6)	Financial interest. Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses or both of the proposed business. 
(7)	Residency information. The length of residence of the applicant, or members of the partnership, or officers, directors and stockholders of the corporation, in the city, and if the residence is less than one year prior to the date of application, the last prior place of residence of the parties. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-33) 
Sec. 10-38. - Fingerprinting. 
Any applicant for a license to be issued pursuant to this article shall accompany the application with two complete sets of fingerprints of the applicant and applicant's manager, if the regular operations of the business will be conducted by one other than the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, of all partners of the partnership; if the applicant is a corporation, of all officers and directors of the corporation. The foregoing provisions shall apply to transfers of licenses, to changes in partners, officers or directors of corporations. The fingerprints shall be taken by the police department on forms to be provided by the department and the applicant shall pay a fee in the amount established by the city council for each individual fingerprinted. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-34) 
State Law reference— Fingerprints of applicants to be furnished, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 10-39. - Designation of corporate agent. 
All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses required by this article shall name in the application one or more persons resident in the state and county as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of the person and the mailing to any such person at the address of any notice required to be given under this article shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the state and county, another person shall immediately be appointed in writing in such person's place, and written notice shall be given to the city stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-35) 
Sec. 10-40. - When applications due. 
All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be filed with the city clerk prior to December 1 of the particular year of filing. Applications for alcoholic beverage licenses submitted to the city clerk between December 1 and December 31 shall not be considered by the council until the first regularly scheduled meeting in the following January. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-36) 
Sec. 10-41. - False statements. 
The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be sufficient cause of the refusal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of the license by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-37) 
Sec. 10-42. - Notice for distilled spirits license. 
No application for a distilled spirits license shall be acted upon by the city council until the applicant shall have run a notice of the application in a newspaper published in the county, at least ten days prior to the meeting of the city council at which the application is to be presented and considered. The notice shall contain the names of all persons named in the application, and the location of the proposed business. The notice shall not be required from an existing license holder making application for the renewal of an existing distilled spirits license at the same location. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-38) 
Sec. 10-43. - Fees—Imposed; credits. 
(a)	Fee to accompany application. All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the United States, certified check or cashier's check, payable to the city for the proper amount of the license fee. In the event that the license is refused, the same shall be returned to the applicant. 
(b)	Credit for prior license. Any present retail dealer, package only license holder who is approved for a mixed drink license and no longer desires to continue sales by the package only, may turn in the person's retail dealer, package only license and receive a pro rata credit towards the purchase of the mixed drinks license of mixed drinks, bona fide private club license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, §§ 3-39, 3-41) 
State Law reference— Maximum fees for municipal liquor license, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 10-44. - Same—Proration. 
Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after January 1 and before July 1 shall pay the full annual license fee. Any person who begins to do business on or after July 1 shall pay one-half of the annual license fee unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-40) 
Sec. 10-45. - Investigation. 
Upon receipt by the city treasurer of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, or for the transfer of any license, the officer shall forward the same to the chief of police for investigation. The chief, following the investigation, shall either approve or disapprove the application, and shall attach thereto the entire police record of every person named in the application. The chief of police shall forward the application with the chief's recommendation to the city council. The city council shall approve or disapprove the issuance of the license. An investigation fee in the amount determined by the city council shall accompany the application; it shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-42) 
Sec. 10-46. - Bond required. 
(a)	Amount of bond. Before any license for spirituous liquors is granted, the applicant must file with the city treasurer a corporate surety bond in a surety company licensed to do business in the state, conditioned to pay all taxes due the state in amounts as follows: 
(1)	Manufacturers ..... $4,000.00 
(2)	Wholesalers ..... $3,000.00 
(3)	Retailers ..... $2,500.00 
(b)	Approval by council. The bonds are to be approved by the city council and shall be executed on forms that may be prescribed by the city council. 
(c)	Bond conditions. The bonds shall be conditioned, among other things, that the applicant when granted a license to sell distilled liquors, shall pay all sums due to the city and comply with all the rules and regulations governing the sale of spirituous liquors and the other conditions as the city council may require in its rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-43) 
Sec. 10-47. - Licenses issued with special conditions. 
Any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city council may contain certain special conditions that the license holder will have to meet prior to or during the term the alcoholic beverage license is in effect. In the event the special terms and conditions are not met by the license holder, the license issued with the special terms and conditions may be suspended or revoked, or denied when the license holder seeks a renewal of the license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-44) 
Sec. 10-48. - Manufacturer's location restricted. 
A manufacturer's license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to manufacture only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued, at one location only. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-45) 
Sec. 10-49. - Wholesaler's activities restricted. 
A wholesale dealer's license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued, and only in the original unbroken container, to persons holding a retail license for the sale of that alcoholic beverage, for the purpose of resale only. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-46) 
Sec. 10-50. - Package dealers. 
(a)	Permitted sales; unopened containers. A retail dealer (sale by package only) license in any category issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell only the alcoholic beverage for which the license is issued, at one location only, and only in the original and unopened container. It shall not permit the opening of containers in the package store where sold, and shall not permit the drinking of the contents of the containers in the package store where sold. All spirituous liquors possessed by a licensee shall be kept in the package store. 
(b)	Entrances and exits. No retailer's place of business shall have more than one entrance, which must open on a public street, and the place of business shall have no other entrance except as approved by state laws, and shall contain no vestibule, closet, booth, room or other place where persons may consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	Vicinity to other businesses. The place of business operated under this license shall not be operated in conjunction with or open into or have access to or from any lunchroom, dining room, dance hall or store. The windows in the retail place of business shall not be obstructed or obscured, but shall be so arranged that a passerby on the street can view the premises of the retailer by looking through windows opening on the street. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-47) 
Sec. 10-51. - Package and consumption on-premises malt beverage dealers. 
A malt beverage retail dealer license (package and for consumption on premises) issued under the provisions of this article will entitle licensee to sell at one location malt beverages to consumers to take out or to consume on the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-48) 
Sec. 10-52. - Package malt beverage dealers. 
A malt beverage retail dealer license (package only) issued under the provisions of this article will entitle the licensee to sell at one location malt beverages only in the unopened container, and will not authorize or permit the drinking of the contents on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-49) 
Sec. 10-53. - Transferability. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued. Upon proper application, the city council may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a transfer fee equal to one-half the original license fee, provided that the transferee meets all of the qualifications which would have been required had the transferee been an applicant for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-50) 
Sec. 10-54. - Death of license holder. 
Upon the death of any license holder, the person's personal representatives or heirs may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the year without the payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as license holders, or the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after the date of death of the license holder upon payment of the transfer fee referenced in section 10-53. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-50) 
Sec. 10-55. - Sale of interest by licensee. 
Where the license holder is a partnership or corporation, one or more partners, or one or more stockholders, as the case may be, it or they may withdraw from the partnership or the corporation in favor of one or more of the partners or stockholders who were partners or stockholders at the time of the issuance of the license. The sale by a partner or a stockholder of the person's interest in the partnership or the corporation to a person who is not at the time of the sale already a partner or a stockholder shall constitute a ground for revocation of the license unless the new partner or stockholder is a person qualified to hold a license, and unless the transaction is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-51) 
Sec. 10-56. - Change of location. 
The location named in the licensee's application shall not be changed without permission and approval of the city council upon written application made therefor. Approvals as to change of location shall be at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-52) 
Sec. 10-57. - Duration of license; fee refunds. 
No license shall be issued under this article for less than a calendar year, or the remainder thereof. In case of the revocation, suspension or surrender of the license before the expiration of the calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-54) 
Sec. 10-58. - Expiration of license. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire at 12:00 a.m. on December 31 of the year in which issued. All applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that they need not be advertised as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-55) 
Sec. 10-59. - Days and hours of sale. 
(a)	Sunday sales. No person may sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages on Sundays. 
(b)	Election days. The sale of any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages is specifically authorized on election days. 
(c)	Package sales. No retail sales of spirituous liquors or distilled spirits for off-the-premises consumption shall be made in the city, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(d)	By the drink sales. No retail sales of spirituous liquors or distilled spirits by the drink, or malt beverages or wine shall be made in the city in any establishment licensed for on-the-premises consumption, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. the following day, except that on Saturday, no sales of such alcoholic beverages shall be made after 12:00 midnight. Additionally, it shall be the responsibility of licensee's agent or employee to see that all patrons are out of the premises within 30 minutes after the time prescribed for closing; provided, however, in the case of licensed restaurants, motels and bona fide private clubs, the establishments may be kept open for business after times provided in this section, but no mixed drinks, malt beverages or wine may be sold to the public after times stated herein. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-15) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays and election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 10-60. - Grounds for revocation. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. Whether the grounds exist shall be determined by the city council at its sole discretion. 
(1)	The violation by the license holder or license holder's employee of any federal, state or local law or ordinance relating to the use and sale of drugs or alcoholic beverage or involving the use of firearms, theft, violence or a crime of moral turpitude. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council, and actual conviction in a court for the offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)	The failure of the license holder or license holder's employee to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation, occurring inside the premises, or the removal by the license holder or license holder's employees of any customer from inside the premises. 
(3)	Any conduct on the part of the license holder or license holder's employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals of the citizens of the city. 
(4)	Operating or conducting the business on the licensed premises in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals of the citizens of the city, or in the manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)	All licenses are issued subject to revocation or suspension if the fingerprint records accompanying the application reveal past criminal activity on the part of any applicant or other person whose fingerprints are required by this article to be furnished with the application. 
(6)	Upon the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of a license as stated in this article. 
(7)	The failure of the license holder or license holder's employees to keep the licensed premises free and clear of any disturbances of the peace, loud or boisterous conduct, lewd, obscene or immoral entertainment, violation of any federal, state or local law or ordinance relating to the use and sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages or involving the use of firearms, theft, violence or a crime of moral turpitude. The determination of whether the license holder or license holder's employee has violated this section shall be made by the city council; actual conviction in a court for any offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-58) 
Sec. 10-61. - Procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)	Notice to applicant or license holder. After the city council shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, or shall suspend or revoke any existing license, the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing with the reasons therefor stated. 
(b)	Request for hearing. Any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city council shall have the right to request, within ten days after receipt of notice, a hearing on the decision. 
(c)	Scheduling and notice of hearing. Upon receipt by the city council of a request for the hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 working days and the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, shall be notified of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(d)	Conduct of hearing; evidence. At the hearing, the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, and to have witnesses appear in the appellant's behalf, and to cross examine opposing witnesses. The witnesses shall testify under oath and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-59) 
Secs. 10-62—10-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 10-82. - On malt beverages. 
(a)	Amount of tax. The city has levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city specific excise taxes as follows: 
(1)	Bottles, cans, containers. Five cents per 12-ounce container or any portion thereof so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans and containers of various sizes of malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the city. 
(2)	Tap or draft beer. Six dollars on tap or draft beer for each container sold, as hereinafter specified, containing not more than 15½ gallons, and at a like rate for fractional parts where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, the beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(b)	Payment of tax. Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month following the preceding calendar month setting out the exact quantities of malt beverage, by size and type container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month sold within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit excise taxes due to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which the sales were made. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-16) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 10-83. - On wine. 
(a)	Amount of tax. The city has imposed and levied the following specific excise tax upon all retail dealers in wine within the city excise taxes as follows: 
(1)	Five cents on each one-half pint bottle or container. 
(2)	Ten cents on each one pint bottle or container. 
(3)	Twenty-one cents on each one quart bottle or container or on bottle or container known as a fifth. 
(4)	Twenty-two cents on each liter bottle or container. 
(5)	Forty-two cents for each one-half gallon jug or bottle or container. 
(6)	Eighty-three cents on each one gallon jug or container. 
(7)	Eighty-three cents per gallon of wine in other containers. 
(b)	Collection and payment. At the time of delivery of the wine for sale to the retail dealer, the wholesale dealer shall collect from the retail dealer the amount of the taxes the retail dealer is obligated for under this section, and the wholesale dealer shall pay the tax collected to the city treasurer on or before the 20th day of the month following delivery of the wine to the retail dealer and send an accurate record of all wine sold the previous month with the payment. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-17) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 10-84. - On distilled spirits for sale by package. 
(a)	Amount of tax. The city has levied and imposed upon all retail dealers of distilled spirits for sale by the package within the city an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or pro rata portion thereof upon all distilled spirits for sale by the package within the city. 
(b)	Collection and payment. At the time of delivery of the distilled spirits for sale by the package, the wholesale dealer shall collect from the retail dealer the amount of the taxes the retail dealer is obligated for under this section, and the wholesale dealer shall pay the tax collected to the city treasurer on or before the 20th of the month following delivery of distilled spirits for sale by the package and send an accurate record of all distilled spirits sold the previous month with the payment. This excise tax shall apply only to retail dealers of distilled spirits for sale by the package within the city and shall not apply to holders of any type of mixed drink license issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-18) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxes on distilled spirits package sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
Sec. 10-85. - Identifying marks. 
No decal, stamp or other identifying mark shall be required on alcoholic beverages sold in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-16(b)) 
Sec. 10-86. - Taxes are in addition to license fees. 
The excise tax provided for herein shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge that may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-16(c)) 
Sec. 10-87. - Penalties for late payment. 
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a licensee liable for a penalty equal to 20 percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of the remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and remittance are not filed. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-16(d)) 
Sec. 10-88. - Penalty for false or fraudulent reports. 
The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the licensee making the report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance that would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-16(d)) 
Secs. 10-89—10-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 10-112. - Public nuisance; disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices in the licensed premises or to operate the business carried on in the licensed premises in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or licensee's agent or employee to fail to report to the police department any disturbance that occurs immediately outside the licensed premises or in the parking facilities, of which any of them have knowledge. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-57(a)-(b)) 
Sec. 10-113. - Hiring persons with criminal convictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to employ any person who has been convicted of, entered a plea to, or has otherwise been found guilty of a felony, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or alcoholic beverage violation. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-57(c)) 
Sec. 10-114. - Failing to assist law enforcement officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or licensee's agent or employee to fail to assist any law enforcement officer in the performance of the person's duty while the officer is on a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-57(f)) 
Sec. 10-115. - Refusal to admit law enforcement officers. 
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant law enforcement officers admission to any licensed premises at any time upon the verbal request of any law enforcement officer who displays proper identification for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ensure compliance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful to refuse to open any cabinet, storage room or any other area within the licensed premises at the request of such officers. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-57(g)) 
Sec. 10-116. - Advertising restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to advertise in any news media, or by any other means, the fact that alcoholic beverages may be purchased at the establishment except as permitted by state law and by regulations duly promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-56) 
Sec. 10-117. - Proximity to school or church. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage within the prohibited distances to a church building, school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus as set out in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-5) 
Sec. 10-118. - Furnishing to minors. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such as the person's photograph or other written description, and giving the person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card or driver's license. 
(b)	Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person holding an alcoholic beverage license or any other person, or any licensee's agent or employee, to sell, or give away, or permit the sale of or gift of any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age specified by state law, except for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription given by a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with parental consent. 
(c)	Proper identification required; defense. No person shall be convicted under this section if the person has been furnished with the proper identification showing the person who is being furnished alcoholic beverages is over the age required by state law. 
(d)	Prohibited entry; duty of licensee. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, and licensee's agent or employee, to inspect the identification of all patrons to ensure that no person is allowed to enter the premises where entry is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-10) 
State Law reference— Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 10-119. - Consumption, possession by minors. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age specified by state law to purchase or possess any alcoholic beverages except for medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with parental consent. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-11) 
State Law reference— Unlawful possession by minors of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23.1. 
Sec. 10-120. - Acquiring for minors. 
(a)	Prohibited. No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as an agent or otherwise purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of any person under the age required by state law, or otherwise procure or furnish to any person under the age required by state law any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes under the prescription of a physician duly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(b)	Duty of licensee to report. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, and licensee's agent or employee, to report known or suspected violations of this section to the city police department. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-12) 
Sec. 10-121. - Employment of minors; entering licensed premises. 
(a)	Employment prohibited; exceptions. No licensee shall allow or require a person in the licensee's employment under the age required by state law to dispense, serve, sell or take an order for any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under the age required by state law who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(b)	Prohibited entry; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or licensee's agent or employee to allow any person who is not authorized by law to purchase, possess or consume alcoholic beverages to enter a licensed premises; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to restaurants, convenience stores, drug stores, supermarkets or bona fide private clubs. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-13) 
State Law reference— Persons under 18 not allowed to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 10-122. - Misrepresentation of age. 
(a)	Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner whatsoever to falsely misrepresent that the person is of the age required by state law to purchase alcoholic beverages, or that the person is of the age required by state law and in military service for the purpose of buying or possessing alcoholic beverages in violation of this chapter, and the penalty for the misrepresentation shall be as provided in section 1-10. 
(b)	Duty of licensee to report. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, his agent or employee, to promptly report any person misrepresenting his age for the purposes of purchasing alcoholic beverages to the city police department. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-14) 
Sec. 10-123. - Public intoxication; use of drugs. 
(a)	Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type of drug or medicine, now or hereafter controlled by state law, or any other intoxicant type material not prescribed and administered according to state law; to inject or administer orally any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type of drug or medicine controlled by state law, or not prescribed and administered according to law, or to take or use any other intoxicant type materials not according to law, upon the streets, lanes, roads and alleys in the city or in any motor vehicle, house, premises, building or enclosure in the city. 
(b)	Disorderly conduct. The same is hereby defined and declared to be disorderly conduct and injurious to the public morals, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-7) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 10-124. - Drinking or possessing alcoholic beverages in park, playground or school. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage upon real property of the city that is used as a city park, playground or school. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-8) 
State Law reference— Possession of alcoholic beverages on school grounds prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.1. 
Sec. 10-125. - Opened containers. 
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to drink or have in the person's possession in opened containers any alcoholic beverage, the possession of which has been legalized under the laws of the state, except on the premises of private dwelling houses or inside a building; provided, that any building that is a public place of business must be duly licensed and authorized to sell and serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1995, § 3-9) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means an employee of the police department of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)	Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property; or 
(2)	Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Nuisance means an act or situation caused by or contributed to by an animal with or without the permission of the animal's owner or keeper, which act or situation substantially interferes with the rights of citizens to enjoyment of life or property or unreasonably annoys humans or endangers the life or health of persons or other animals. Such a nuisance shall include, but shall not be limited to the following acts by an animal: 
(1)	Molesting or threatening to molest pedestrians; 
(2)	Chasing vehicles; 
(3)	Causing loss or damage to the person or property of someone other than the owner or keeper of the animal; or 
(4)	Continually and repeatedly howling, barking, whining or otherwise making noises which cause unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors and others. 
Owner means any natural persons or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that has, without provocation, bitten a human being on public or private property. 
Proper closure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height, and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner so as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Rabies control officer means an employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the county. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records maintained by the animal control officer pursuant to this chapter 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 14-21. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
Sec. 14-22. - Birds and wild fowl protected; exception. 
It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if vandal birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, such authority is authorized to approve the disposal of such birds. Any individual may prevent any vandal birds from destroying crops or fruit without the authority of the health officer. 
Sec. 14-23. - Hunting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to hunt within the city limits. 
Sec. 14-24. - Livestock and fowl prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to have livestock or fowl in the city limits. 
Sec. 14-25. - Livestock running at large. 
(a)	Impoundment; redemption; fees. The police are required to seize and impound any livestock found at large in violation of section 14-24, and to safely keep the same until it shall be redeemed by its owner, upon the payment of a pound fee in the amount established by the city council for each head impounded, and all costs of care and feeding during impoundment. 
(b)	Sale of animals not redeemed. In case said livestock shall not be redeemed within five days from the date of its seizure, the police shall cause the same to be advertised and sold as an estray, as provided by the laws of the state, if the owner is unknown. But if the owner is known, and he shall fail to redeem such livestock within five days after notice of its impoundment, he shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3. 
Sec. 14-26. - Animal carcasses. 
No person shall deposit any carcass of any dead animal upon any ground, public or private, within the city. 
State Law reference— Disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Secs. 14-27—14-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-38—14-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOG CONFINEMENT AND CONTROL 

Sec. 14-56. - Restraint required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to allow the same to run upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, unless said dog is accompanied by its owner or other person having charge of said dog, in which event said dog must be tied with a cord or chain of sufficient strength to hold such dog. 
Sec. 14-57. - Control of females in heat. 
No person owning or having custody of any female dog shall permit such female dog off the premises of the owner or person having control of such dog when such dog shall be in heat, unless the same is under control and attached to a leash as herein provided. 
Sec. 14-58. - Duty of dog and cat owners. 
The owner and keeper of every dog and cat shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. As a consequence thereof, it is the duty of every owner or keeper of any animal to exercise reasonable care and to take all reasonable steps and precautions necessary to protect persons, property, and animals from injury, loss, or damage that might be caused by or arise from the dog or cat's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
Sec. 14-59. - Parental responsibility. 
If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this section. 
Sec. 14-60. - Nuisance. 
If an animal is kept in such a manner as constitutes a nuisance as defined in this chapter or by state statute, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved or the city. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
Secs. 14-61—14-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-79. - Adoption of county rules. 
All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as part of this section as if fully set out herein. Violation of the adopted rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court of the city, upon citation, as an offense against the city. 
Sec. 14-80. - Vaccination tags. 
The numbered vaccination tag, issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation, shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the animal at all times. 
Secs. 14-81—14-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-104. - Dogs or cats running at large. 
Every dog found roaming or running free, whether tagged or untagged, shall be impounded; every tagged or untagged cat found roaming or running free shall be impounded. If a tagged animal is impounded, and it is found not to be registered or its current registration has expired, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. 
Sec. 14-105. - Care of impounded animals. 
All animals impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner by the city or in accordance with an agreement between the city and some other entity as may from time to time be determined and established by action of the local government. 
Sec. 14-106. - Period of impoundment; fees. 
If a cat or dog is impounded for running at large or for creating a nuisance, the animal shall be retained and impounded for a period of not less than 48 hours unless previously claimed by the animal's owner, in which case said owner shall pay to the city clerk an impoundment fee and a daily boarding fee in the amount established by the city council, plus any veterinary or other incidental expenses associated with the proper care of the animal during the period of impoundment. If the dog or cat is not claimed within 48 hours, the city shall be authorized to dispose of the animal in a humane manner. 
Sec. 14-107. - Additional penalties. 
Nothing in this section relating to impoundment and fees charged in connection therewith shall limit the liability of the owner to the city for violation of this chapter. 
Secs. 14-108—14-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 14-128. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 14-129. - Report; investigation. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the animal control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or the county board of health, the animal control officer shall conduct such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 14-130. - Classification; notice to owner. 
When the animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, and the dog is not registered as required by this article, notice shall be given to the dog's owner in writing, by certified mail, to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. The notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
Sec. 14-131. - Contents of notice. 
The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Findings. The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)	Date. The notice shall be dated. 
(3)	Notice of right to request hearing. The notice shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the governing authority. 
(4)	Effect of failure to request hearing. The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
Sec. 14-132. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)	Time for hearing. When the city receives a request for a hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. 
(b)	Notice of hearing. The city shall notify the dog owner, in writing, by certified mail, of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)	Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and in addition thereto, the city shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the city may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(d)	Notice of determination; effective date. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. 
Sec. 14-133. - Requirements for registration. 
Subject to the requirements of this section, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or if the animal control officer finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)	Proper enclosure. A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)	Warning sign. The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the department of natural resources. 
(3)	Registration fee. Payment to the city of a fee in the amount established by the city council to defray the cost of administering and enforcing this section. 
(4)	Liability insurance. A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. 
(5)	Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state, payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
Sec. 14-134. - Annual registration renewal. 
Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of annual renewal of a certificate of registration, the animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with all other provisions of this article. 
Sec. 14-135. - Compliance not guaranteed by city. 
Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
Sec. 14-136. - Owner responsibility to notify city. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or had been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall also notify the animal control officer if the owner is moving with the animal from the animal control officer's jurisdiction. 
Sec. 14-137. - Time for new residents to register. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, who is a new resident of the city and the state, shall register the dog in the manner provided by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. An owner who is a new resident of the city, but not of the state, shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within ten days after becoming a resident of the city. 
Sec. 14-138. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	Proper restraint required. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(b)	Warning sign required. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog is located in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 14-139. - Impoundment for violation. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if: 
(1)	The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with this article. 
(2)	The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of this article. 
(3)	The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free. 
Sec. 14-140. - Redemption of impounded dog. 
(a)	Compliance required; fees. Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this article shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment cost, as fixed by a schedule approved by the city, as from time to time amended. 
(b)	Notice to owner. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given to the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. This notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditiously and humane manner; provided, however, no dog shall have been destroyed under this section unless it has been held for a full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. 
Sec. 14-141. - Liability of owner. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. 
Sec. 14-142. - Liability of city. 
Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city that enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, that the city has failed to identify as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, that has been identified as being a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this article, or by a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in section 14-133. 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM STANDARDS CODE 

Sec. 18-19. - Purpose and intent. 
The city declares it to be in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare to adopt certain standard building, technical, mechanical, and maintenance codes, to facilitate property inspection by the city, the county, and the state related to construction and maintenance of buildings within the city. 
Sec. 18-20. - State minimum standards codes adopted. 
The city adopts by reference as if fully set forth herein, the following minimum standards codes as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 and as published by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)	International Building Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(2)	International Residential Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(3)	International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(4)	International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007) and 2007 Errata for Georgia Amendments to the 2006 International Mechanical Code. 
(5)	International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2007). 
(6)	National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, with Georgia Amendments (2006). 
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code, 2000 edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments (2003), 2003 Errata for Georgia Supplements and Amendments to the 2000 International Energy Conservation Code, Supplements and Amendments (2005), 2005 Errata for Georgia Supplements and Amendments to the 2000 International Energy Conservation Code, Supplements and Amendments (2006), Supplements and Amendments (2007). 
(8)	International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition. 
(9)	International Existing Building Code, 2003 edition. 
(Ord. No. 589, § 5-1, 10-12-1998) 
Sec. 18-21. - Compliance required. 
No structure shall be constructed or altered, and no installation of gas, water, sewer, or other utility-related service shall be installed, except in compliance with the codes adopted in this article. All structures within the city shall be continuously maintained in compliance with the codes adopted in this article. 
Sec. 18-22. - Administration and enforcement. 
When reference is made in the codes adopted in this article to an enforcement official, it shall mean the city official or employee (public officer) who has duties corresponding to those of the official named in the code. 
(Ord. No. 589, § 5-3, 10-12-1998) 
Secs. 18-23—18-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means the applicable provisions of the codes adopted in article II of this chapter and any applicable county, state, or federal building or housing standards. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act that is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means buildings or structures or parts thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)	Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)	Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon the dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority who is in charge of any department or branch of the municipality relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the municipality. 
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by state law and by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Service means the connection or reconnection of water, sewer, electric, or sanitation services to any residential, commercial, or industrial building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 589, § 5-1, 10-12-1998; Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-1) 
Sec. 18-49. - Penalties. 
Persons violating this article shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-10. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and be subject to the same penalties. The penalties provided in this section are nonexclusive and in no way preclude or limit any other remedy available to the city under this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 589, § 5-5, 10-12-1998) 
Sec. 18-50. - Administration. 
The primary responsibility and authority for the enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested in the building inspector, or such inspector's duly authorized representative, who, for the purposes of this article, shall be deemed the public officer as more particularly defined in section 18-48. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-2) 
Sec. 18-51. - Compliance required for connection. 
No service shall be provided to any resident, commercial, or industrial building or structure within the city unless the building or structure conforms in all respects with the codes adopted pursuant to this article and any applicable county and state building or safety regulations. 
Sec. 18-52. - Defects rendering structure unfit. 
A dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of the dwelling, building, or structure; the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or other residents in the city. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)	Dilapidation; 
(4)	Disrepair; 
(5)	Structural defects; 
(6)	Uncleanliness; 
(7)	Exclusive of the foundation, if 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of the damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings is present; 
(8)	Improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe; 
(9)	Previous damage by fire, wind, vandalism, or other cause; 
(10)	Decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or other such conditions likely to cause sickness or disease to occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, or to the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; 
(11)	Inadequate means of ingress and egress, such as insufficient stairways, elevators, or fire escapes, so as to cause a danger to occupants or residents; 
(12)	Conditions that are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures, or other residents of the city; 
(13)	Dilapidation or disrepair to such an extent that portions of the dwelling, building, or structure may fall or cave in; 
(14)	Buildings existing in violation of any provision of any code previously adopted by the city, including, but not limited to, any building code and any fire prevention code, previously adopted; and 
(15)	Any conditions with respect to the dwelling, building, or structure that are described in section 202 of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-4(a)) 
Sec. 18-53. - Vacant and dilapidated structures. 
The public officer shall also be authorized to determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation by the public officer or upon the report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed at the location of such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-4(b)) 
Sec. 18-54. - Duty of owner to maintain property. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the municipal limits of the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with all applicable codes in force within the city and in conformance with such ordinances which regulate or prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-5) 
Secs. 18-55—18-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for adoption of ordinances enforcing nuisance of unfit buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

Sec. 18-82. - Petition; notice; hearing. 
(a)	Complaint. Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is: 
(1)	Unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)	Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)	Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that the dwelling, building, structure, or property satisfies the criteria stated in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. 
(b)	Summons; service. The public officer shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)	Contents of complaint. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference, identify the owner and parties in interest, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(d)	Contents of summons. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place within the municipality where the property is located. The hearing shall be held not less than 15 days or more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. 
(e)	Answer and testimony of owner. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)	Determination and order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question meets the criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner, and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the its present value, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(g)	Calculating cost to value comparison. 
(1)	For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. 
(2)	Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
(3)	The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without the requirement that actual testimony be presented. 
(4)	Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-6(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 18-83. - Posting of structure. 
If the owner or other defendant fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-6(d)) 
Sec. 18-84. - Salvage of materials; distribution of proceeds. 
If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-6(e)) 
Sec. 18-85. - Costs to be lien on property. 
The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-6(f)) 
Sec. 18-86. - Extensions of time. 
The court may, in its discretion, grant an extension of time within which to comply with any order entered by the court pursuant to this division, which extension shall be for a definite term and shall be in writing. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-7) 
Sec. 18-87. - Attachment of lien. 
(a)	Time of attachment. The lien provided for herein shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by statute. 
(b)	Recording and indexing. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-8(a)) 
Sec. 18-88. - Collection; interest. 
After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of city ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The city clerk shall remit the amount collected to the city council. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-8(a)) 
Sec. 18-89. - Waiver and release of lien. 
The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-8(b)) 
Sec. 18-90. - Service of notices and orders issued by public officer. 
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this division shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)	Posting; service. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
a.	Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county where the property is located. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the municipal court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
b.	Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78; or 
c.	Statutory overnight delivery. 
(2)	Nonresidents of the city. If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state, but resides outside of the county where the property is located, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)	Nonresidents of the state. Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)	Service of guardians and personal representatives. In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided herein for nonresidents. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)	Unknown persons and remaindermen. In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(6)	Whereabouts unknown. In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve, by publication, in the manner provided in subsection (3) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(7)	Filing of lis pendens. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(8)	Subsequent service. Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. 
(9)	Waiver of notice. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-9) 
Sec. 18-91. - Temporary injunction. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer, pending the final disposition of the matter; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the superior court on petitions within 20 days of the filing thereof. The superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-10) 
Sec. 18-92. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state, nor is permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-11) 
Sec. 18-93. - Appeal. 
Review of an order of the magistrate court requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-12) 
Sec. 18-94. - Appropriations. 
The city council is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary or appropriate and may accept and apply for and utilize grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-13) 
Sec. 18-95. - Authority; conflict of law. 
The powers and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental of any other powers and authority granted to the city and its agents by state statute or this Code. In the event of a conflict between this division and the minimum standards codes adopted in article II of this chapter, the provisions of this division shall apply. 
(Ord. of 6-13-2005, § 9-15) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation, or calling of any kind, subject, by the provisions of this chapter, to a business or occupation tax. 
Engaged in business means performing any act of selling any goods or services or soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or when a person is involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator, or agent in any business, trade, profession, occupation within the city. Any person deemed to be engaged in business is thus subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Manufacturer means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufacturers for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities; including all the activities of a commercial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or by machinery, to materials so that, as a result thereof a new, different, or useful article of trade or commerce is produced, and including the production or fabrication of specially or custom made articles, and including the making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning, and preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables, and meats. 
Retailer means a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property. 
Services means accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer anything in the form of tangible personal property. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-1) 
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-21. - Lighting required. 
All proprietors or operators of business establishments shall be required to provide and maintain sufficient illumination on all parts of parking lots to render all positions of all persons upon such parking areas clearly visible to other patrons and proprietors, from the time of darkness until the time of closing. 
Secs. 22-22—22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGISTRATION AND LICENSING 

Sec. 22-46. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all businesses other than businesses specifically addressed in other articles within this chapter, including, but not limited to: 
Accountants; 
Air conditioning sales, service; 
Amusement services; 
Appliances, sales and services; 
Appraisers, real and personal property; 
Architects; 
Arts and crafts; 
Attorneys; 
Auto dealers, sales and services; 
Bakers; 
Barbers; 
Beauty shops; 
Bookkeeping services; 
Building contractors; 
Bus lines; 
Billiard rooms; 
Canvassers, peddlers, traveling salesmen; 
Carpenters; 
Carpets, sales, installations, cleaning; 
Carwash; 
Certified public accountants; 
Cleaning and janitorial services; 
Clothing stores; 
Contractors, general; 
Cotton gins; 
Dancing schools; 
Day care centers, (senior, nursery, and kindergarten); 
Delicatessens; 
Department stores (general merchandise); 
Disco; 
Doctors; 
Drug stores; 
Dry cleaners; 
Dry goods stores; 
Electrical contractors, electricians; 
Express companies; 
Exterminators; 
Fabric shops; 
Farm produce (buyers and processors); 
Farm supplies; 
Fast food vendors; 
Feed and seed dealers; 
Funeral directors; 
Furniture sales; 
Game rooms; 
Gas companies; 
Gift shops; 
Grain dealers, driers; 
Grave markers, monuments; 
Grocers; 
Gunsmith; 
Hardware dealers; 
Heating/air conditioning, sales and services; 
Hotel/motel; 
Insurance sales; 
Interior decorators; 
Janitorial and cleaning services; 
Junk and scrap dealers; 
Laundromats; 
Laundry trucks; 
Lawyers; 
Loan agents; 
Lumber/timber dealers; 
Liquor stores; 
Manufacturers; 
Merchants, general merchandise; 
Monuments/grave markers; 
Motel/hotels; 
Mobile home parks; 
Newspapers; 
Nursery, landscape and ornamental plants; 
Office supplies, sales and services; 
Painters (buildings and signs, artistic for sale); 
Paving contractors; 
Pharmacies; 
Photographers (commercial); 
Piano, sales and tuning; 
Plumbing contractors and supplies; 
Print shops; 
Real estate brokers and agents; 
Restaurants, conventional and fast food; 
Roofing contractors; 
Scrap dealers (junk); 
Seeds and plants; 
Service stations (gasoline, tires, batteries, etc.); 
Shoe shop (repairs); 
Service repairman; 
Television, video, records (sales and service); 
Tree experts, tree trimmers; 
Upholstery service; 
Variety stores; 
Video sales; 
Woodyards and wood dealers; 
Wrecker service (auto, building); 
Any other category designated by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-32) 
Sec. 22-47. - Exception. 
This article shall not apply to persons who grow and sell their own vegetables or fruit. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-33) 
Sec. 22-48. - Registration required. 
Every person engaging in any business in the city upon which a tax is levied by the provisions of this or any other chapter of this Code shall register with the city clerk on or before February 15 of each year, on forms supplied by the clerk, giving the name, address, type of business, and such other information as may be required by the city for the purpose of determining the amount of tax to be assessed. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-2) 
Sec. 22-49. - Payment of tax. 
(a)	Due date. All taxes assessed and fixed in this article shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year or within 45 days thereafter, excluding the telephone occupational license tax, which shall be due and payable on or before March 31 of each year. For new business, taxes shall be due at the time the business is commenced. 
(b)	Method of payment. Payment of the tax may be made by mail or personally to the city, by company check, money order, bank draft, certified check, or cashier's check, made payable to the city. The tax shall be payable in a single installment. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-3) 
Sec. 22-50. - Late payment penalties. 
Any person failing to register and pay the tax due under the terms of this article on or before February 15, or in the case of a new business, within five days of commencing business, shall be subject to a penalty of 20 percent of the business or occupational tax or portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-4) 
Sec. 22-51. - Issuance of tax certificate. 
Upon the payment of the taxes assessed in this article, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue to each person a business or occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-5) 
Sec. 22-52. - Certificate to be displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the business or occupational tax certificate referenced in section 22-51 in some conspicuous place in their business establishment. Any transient or nonresident person doing business with the city shall carry such certificate either upon his person or on any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when requested to do so. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-6) 
Sec. 22-53. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the city clerk of such move and the new address in writing no later than five days after moving. The same business tax certificate will be valid at the new location except those dealing with alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-7) 
Sec. 22-54. - Change of ownership. 
No business tax certificate may be transferred from one person to another. Additions to or deletions from the ownership of the business, which do not affect the liability and the principal ownership of a business for which the certificate is issued, may be made without canceling the old business or occupational tax certificates and applying for a new certificate. Whenever any person shall lease, operate, manage or control the business franchise or property of other persons, he shall pay a separate business tax certificate for each business. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-8) 
Sec. 22-55. - Enforcement. 
The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding taxes assessed by this article. Such executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-9) 
Sec. 22-56. - Exemption for new industries. 
New industrial plants in the city employing 50 or more employees shall be issued a business license for the first year, or portion thereof, of operation at no cost. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-10) 
Sec. 22-57. - Schedule of license fees. 
The business license or occupation fees will be assessed and reevaluated by the mayor and city council at such times and in such manner as they deem necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-11) 
Sec. 22-58. - License review. 
Upon request, any license may be brought for review by the city council at its regular monthly meeting. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-12) 
Secs. 22-59—22-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-90. - Annual license fee. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company that is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)	Payment required. Each insurer doing business within the city shall pay an annual license fee in the amount established by the city council. Each separate business location in excess of one, operating on behalf of an insurer within the city shall pay a license fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 1; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-20) 
Sec. 22-91. - License fees and gross premium tax. 
With the exception of life insurers, all insurance companies or independent agents doing business within the corporate limits of the city shall pay an annual license fee and gross premium tax as follows: 
(1)	License fee. An annual license fee in the amount established by the city council. 
(2)	Life, accident, and health policies. One percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year on every policy of life, accident, and sickness insurance issued or written upon persons residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)	Other policies. Two percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from all other policies issued or written upon persons residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-20) 
Sec. 22-92. - Due date; delinquency. 
The fees and taxes described herein shall become due and payable on January 1. Any such license fee or tax duly imposed by the mayor and council, not paid by February 15, shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-21) 
Sec. 22-93. - Report. 
Simultaneously with the payment of fees and taxes imposed under this article, every insurance company or independent agent doing business within the city and subject to the fees and taxes herein imposed shall file with the city clerk, on forms prescribed by him, a report showing the names and addresses of the independent agent representing the company in the city, the location and person in charge of the company, the classes of insurance written, and such other reasonable information as may be required by the city. In addition, the company or agent shall furnish complete information regarding the premiums received, by class, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. The report shall be made by affidavit of an officer of the company. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-21) 
Sec. 22-94. - Making false report. 
Any person who knowingly permits an agent or employee to give false or incomplete information of any such report shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-21) 
Sec. 22-95. - Report contents confidential. 
All reports required to be filed under this article shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the city, its employees, agents, and designees, responsible for administering this article 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-21) 
Sec. 22-96. - Enforcement; penalties; continuing violation. 
The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this article shall be grounds for refusing or revoking the license of the violator and the companies represented, and the person responsible shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-10. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a continuing offense and each 30 days that such failure is perpetrated or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-22) 
Secs. 22-97—22-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 22-121. - Life insurer license fees. 
Each life insurer doing business within the city, other than businesses required to pay fees and taxes pursuant to section 22-90, shall pay an annual license fee, in the amount established by the city council in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 for each separate business location in excess of one. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 3; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-23) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to impose license fees on life insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 22-122. - Independent agencies and brokers license fees. 
Independent agencies and brokers shall pay an annual license fee, in the amount established by the city council, for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and that is not subject to the company license fee imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 3; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-23) 
Sec. 22-123. - Gross premiums tax on life, accident, and health insurers. 
Each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city is assessed a gross premiums tax in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 4; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-24) 
Sec. 22-124. - Gross premiums tax for all other insurers. 
Each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the city shall pay an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 5; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-24) 
Sec. 22-125. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this division shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar year. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1995, § 6; Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-25) 
Secs. 22-126—22-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 22-149. - Occupational license tax. 
Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay, on or before March 31 of each year, an occupational license tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the recurring local service revenues billed during the month of January preceding the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-27) 
Sec. 22-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)	Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.	Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.	The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.	Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.	Subscriber station revenues from the typewriter exchange service. 
(2)	Charges for Morse transmissions, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)	All charges for local private line service (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the corporate limits of the city. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by cable television providers. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-27) 
Secs. 22-151—22-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 22-169. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in section 22-172 during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the gross receipts tax is due. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-170. - Gross receipts tax levied. 
All state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations, shall pay an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of their gross receipts. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
State Law reference— Authority for local taxation of financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 22-171. - Minimum tax. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-172. - Calculation of gross receipts—Banks. 
Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are: 
(1)	Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)	Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)	Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale; 
(4)	Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States; 
(5)	Dividends on stocks; 
(6)	Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)	Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)	Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(9)	Other service charges, commission, and fees; 
(10)	Other income. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-173. - Same—Savings and loan associations. 
Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are: 
(1)	Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others; 
(2)	Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities; 
(3)	Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)	Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)	Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)	Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)	Loan fees; 
(8)	Loan servicing fees; 
(9)	Other fees and charges; 
(10)	Gross income from real-estate-owned operations; 
(11)	Net income from office building operations; 
(12)	Gross income from real estate held for investments; 
(13)	Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(14)	Miscellaneous operating income; 
(15)	Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets; 
(16)	Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-174. - Deductions from gross receipts. 
The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to section 22-172 or 22-173: 
(1)	An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)	An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to the Domestic International Banking Facility Act, O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.; 
(3)	An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
(4)	An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income that is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; 
(5)	To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (2) through (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (2) through (4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Sec. 22-175. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution with the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on April 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Ord. of 12-11-1995, § 10-31) 
Secs. 22-176—22-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BILLIARD AND GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 22-204. - Compliance with state law. 
Billiard rooms (pool halls) and game rooms must be in compliance with all applicable state laws. 
Sec. 22-205. - Qualifications for licensure. 
No license for the operation of a billiard room, pool hall, or game room shall be granted unless the applicant meets the following qualifications: 
(1)	The applicant must file an application for licensure as required herein, accompanied by the license fee established by the council. 
(2)	The applicant must be 21 years of age. 
(3)	The applicant may not have been convicted of a felony in any state or federal court. 
(4)	The application must be approved by the county. 
(5)	The applicant must provide to the city a surety bond in the amount established by the city council. 
Sec. 22-206. - Hours of operation. 
Billiard rooms (pool halls) and game rooms may be open between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. All such establishments shall be closed on Sundays. For purposes of this section, the term "game rooms" includes businesses offering video and coin-operated amusement devices. 
Sec. 22-207. - Minors prohibited. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in any billiard room (pool hall) or game room in which beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. 
Secs. 22-208—22-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 

Sec. 22-300. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Ellaville Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-301. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(a)—(k). 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-302. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-303. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Pinball machines; 
(2)	Console machines; 
(3)	Video games; 
(4)	Crane machines; 
(5)	Claw machines; 
(6)	Purchase machines; 
(7)	Bowling machines; 
(8)	Novelty arcade games; 
(9)	Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)	Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)	Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)	Basketball machines; 
(13)	Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)	Kiddie ride games; 
(15)	Skeet-ball machines; 
(16)	Air hockey machines; 
(17)	Roll down machines; 
(18)	Trivia machines; 
(19)	Laser games; 
(20)	Simulator games; 
(21)	Virtual reality machines; 
(22)	Maze games; 
(23)	Racing games; 
(24)	Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. 43-8-1(3); and 
(25)	Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not including the following: 
a.	Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.	Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
c.	Gas and electric meters; 
d.	Pay telephones; 
e.	Pay toilets; 
f.	Cigarette vending machines; 
g.	Coin operated vending machines; 
h.	Coin operated scales; 
i.	Coin operated gumball machines; 
j.	Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
k.	Coin operated massage beds; and 
l.	Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in the O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-304. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license and without obtaining an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-305. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)	Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)	Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)	Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)	List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The city shall not require a fee for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-306. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paying the required occupational tax and obtaining an occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-307. - Minimum distance requirements. 
Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. This section shall not apply at any location for which a license has previously been issued and, during the term of such license, a church building, school building, education building, school grounds, college campus, alcoholic treatment center, or housing authority property was subsequently acquired, constructed, or began operation within the proscribed distance(s), nor to the renewal of such license by the same licensee. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-308. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-309. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)	Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)	Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the city clerk's office. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(c)	No location owner or location operator may derive more than 50 percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-310. - Notice requirements. 
(a)	Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)	Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)	The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-311. - Compliance with Georgia law relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-312. - License suspension and revocation; hearings before hearing officer. 
(a)	The city may suspend or revoke the city issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(b)	The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)	The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)	No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)	The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
b.	Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
c.	Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
d.	Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
e.	Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
f.	Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttable presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)	Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)	The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)	Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross-examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)	The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one or more of the following: 
a.	Revocation of the license; 
b.	Suspension of the license for not less than 15 days and no more than 12 months; 
c.	Imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months; 
d.	Civil monetary penalty not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or 
e.	Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation. 
Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)	The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)	Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the mayor, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-313. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)	Penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction, are as follows: 
(1)	Minimum penalty: Fine not less than $100.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Maximum penalty: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or a combination of the aforementioned. 
(b)	The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	Offering one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-314. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machines: 
(1)	Minimum penalty: Fine not less than $100.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Maximum penalty: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
The municipal court of the city shall have authority to place any person sentenced under this section on probation for a period up to one year. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-315. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)	Inspection. The chief of police or his designee may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)	Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)	Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.	Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.	Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
c.	Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.	Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place; 
e.	Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-316. - Security cameras required. 
Any party holding a license pursuant to this article is required to install a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area with cameras and lens of a type, number and location approved by the chief of police or his designee. Such camera(s) must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation during all hours in which such establishment is opened for business. The camera shall be subject to monthly inspection by the chief of police or his designee, and the establishments must have immediate availability of a back-up camera system in the event the primary system becomes inoperable. If a crime occurs or any employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the film retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-317. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)	Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)	The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 22-318. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2016) 
Chapter 23 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 23-1. - Purpose and authority. 
The mayor and city council of the city find that the historical and cultural heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the city and of the public generally. The governing body of the city further acknowledges that the city's existing and future cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are and will be uniquely precious and vulnerable and are deserving of continued stewardship, that the city is richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased, and that restoring places and memorials of those who have passed on are valuable to current and future generations of city residents. As a consequence of the foregoing, the governing body of the city deems it appropriate to adopt this chapter of the city Code for the purpose of protecting and safeguarding the city's existing and future cemeteries and regulating the use of such cemeteries for the people of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-2. - Cemeteries affected; future cemeteries. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings, structures, and improvements within boundaries delineated on the map entitled "Ellaville City Cemetery Areas," which is attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived as exhibit "A" and incorporated by specific reference thereto. Any future cemeteries established by the governing body of the city which are to be subject to this chapter shall be added hereto by amendment to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" was not included in the codification of this chapter. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY POWERS AND AUTHORITY RELATING TO CEMETERIES 

Sec. 23-3. - Power of mayor and city council. 
The governing body of the city shall have the power and authority to undertake the following: 
(1)	To provide, own, and furnish, in or near the city, cemeteries for the burial of the dead; 
(2)	To regulate and control the interments in such cemeteries; 
(3)	To exercise police power and control over such cemeteries; and 
(4)	To care for such cemeteries utilizing city funds appropriated for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-4. - Administration. 
The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall be responsible for management of all city cemeteries. All records, registrations, and fee payments shall be made to the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-5. - Fees. 
A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the governing body of the city with respect to the sale of lots and the provision of services by the city in city cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-6. - Sales proceeds. 
All proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots shall be segregated and maintained in a separate fund, and such funds shall be used solely for the upkeep of city cemeteries. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the governing body of the city from appropriating additional funds to be used for the upkeep of city cemeteries in the city's budget ordinance as adopted or amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - ELLAVILLE CEMETERY COMMISSION 

Sec. 23-7. - Creation of the commission. 
There is hereby created the Ellaville Cemetery Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "commission.") The commission shall have all authority established in this chapter or as directed by the governing body of the city, shall be considered as part of the planning and development functions of the city government, and shall be administered by the staff in the city manager's office as part of the city's planning and development activities. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-8. - Membership on the commission; number; appointment; term; compensation. 
The commission shall consist of a total of five members. One member of the commission shall be the city manager, who shall be a voting member of the commission and shall serve as a member of the commission at all times during his or her term as city manager. At least two of the remaining four members shall have demonstrated a special interest in cemeteries in Ellaville and associated history, preservation, and similar matters. The four members appointed shall be registered voters of the city and shall be appointed by the governing body of the city and shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments of the four members shall be staggered so that two members shall be appointed for initial terms of two years, and the other two members shall be appointed for initial terms of three years. After the initial terms are completed, all members shall be appointed for three year terms. Commission members shall serve without compensation and are subject to all city policies and the city's code of ethics. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-9. - Powers of the commission. 
The commission shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities: 
(1)	Undertake and perform cemetery management activities with respect to the cemeteries as an official agency of the city; 
(2)	Advise and work with the governing body of the city to establish best maintenance measures regarding cemeteries and to establish additional programs or standards as may be deemed necessary or appropriate in order to supplement the city's care of the cemeteries; 
(3)	Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to the city cemeteries as the governing body of the city or the commission may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate in carrying out the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)	Recommend to the governing body of the city the restoration or preservation of any cemetery or features located therein; 
(5)	Seek out state and federal funds to be utilized for cemetery stewardship and preservation and make recommendations to the governing body of the city covering the most appropriate use of such funds obtained; 
(6)	Receive, on behalf of the city, donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property related to the ongoing maintenance, operation, renovation, or preservation of the city's cemeteries; provided, however, that the commission shall not obligate the city in any manner without prior consent of the governing body; and 
(7)	Promote the acquisition by the city of additional cemetery property as the commission may deem necessary or appropriate, either adjacent to the existing cemetery or in other areas within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-10. - Rules of procedure. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, shall provide for a time and place of regular meetings, shall provide for the calling of special meetings, and shall comply in all respects with the Georgia Open Meetings Act and the Georgia Open Records. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the then-serving members of the commission. All commission members shall vote on all issues that come before the commission unless members are immediately interested or otherwise prevented from voting by a conflict of interest. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-11. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a matter in which a member of the commission is immediately and personally interested, such member shall abstain from voting or discussion of the matter prior to and during the meeting at which such matter is discussed by the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-12. - Public records. 
A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The commission shall maintain a copy of all cemetery surveys, planning studies, rules, and regulations that apply to city cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 23-13. - Adoption of regulations. 
The commission shall be authorized to adopt regulations for the management, care, and use of the city's cemeteries. The commission shall further have the ability to adopt and amend rules of procedure. Any such rules or regulations shall become effective only after review and approval by the governing body of the city. Cemetery regulations as adopted by the commission and approved by the governing body of the city shall apply to all designated city cemetery areas. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-14. - Appeals of commission decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the commission may appeal the action to the governing body of the city. Such appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten business days after the Commission's decision has been made. The decision of the mayor and city council regarding such appeal shall be final and binding upon all parties. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 23-15. - Penalties. 
Any violations of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment in accord with the provisions of section 1-12 of the city Code. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2016) 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means the Emergency and Disaster Mutual Aid Agreement. 
Assisting city or county means the participating city or county furnishing equipment, services, personnel, or other aid pursuant to this chapter. 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this section from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes damage or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor, or the President of the United States. 
EMA means emergency management agency. 
Emergency means any occurrence, or threat thereof, whether natural, or caused by man, in war or in peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, consequence management functions to include victim services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Emergency management director (EMA director) means the person appointed by the county governing authority to implement the emergency plan of the county. 
Employees means paid, volunteer, and auxiliary employees and emergency management workers. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, means those individuals engaged in the provision of designated essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Participating city or county means a city or county that has duly enacted this chapter. 
Receiving city or county means the participating city or county requesting equipment, services, personnel, or other aid pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 26-2. - Mutual aid agreement and emergency management plan. 
The city has entered into a mutual aid agreement with the county and has adopted the pre-disaster mitigation plan designated by the city council, both of which documents are available for review in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 26-3—26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27 et seq. 

Sec. 26-23. - Creation; membership; office. 
An emergency management agency is created in and for the city. The office of the emergency management agency shall be the city hall. 
Sec. 26-24. - Emergency management director. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a director of emergency management for the city. When appointed, the city emergency management director will be a deputy director on the county emergency management staff and is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)	To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations; 
(3)	To assist in developing in conjunction with the county emergency management director, the plan for emergency functions for the county emergency organization; 
(4)	To render reports as required by governing officials; 
(5)	Maintaining, with authority of governing officials, the facility used as the city emergency operations center; 
(6)	Coordinate the activities of the city emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of the city council. 
State Law reference— Authority for establishment of local emergency management organization, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 26-25. - Emergency powers. 
Upon a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor, or in his absence his legally appointed successor, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces; 
(2)	To seize, take for temporary use of, or condemn any property for the protection of the public; 
(3)	To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
State Law reference— Powers of local governing bodies during state of emergency or disaster, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 26-26. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
State Law reference— Rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 26-27—26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 26-56. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency, or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the city. 
Sec. 26-57. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)	To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article; 
(2)	To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article, if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of this city; and 
(3)	To wear, carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
State Law reference— Authority for local rules and regulations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 26-58. - Meetings of city council. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. The presiding officer or any two members of the city council, without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law, may call such meetings. 
State Law reference— Operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 26-59. - Purchasing and public works contracts. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; however, any public works contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
Sec. 26-60. - Code enforcement. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, if: 
(1)	The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)	The suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)	The suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
Sec. 26-61. - Temporary dwellings. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired; provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the city health department and building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
Sec. 26-62. - Curfew. 
(a)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and the property of the city. 
(b)	All of the territory of the unincorporated city shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)	The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
Sec. 26-63. - Prohibition of appearance in public places. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated city during the stated hours of the curfew. 
Sec. 26-64. - City operations. 
To promote civil stability and to provide basic services to the city in the case of emergencies or hazardous inclement weather, it is essential that the city be able to maintain an adequate workforce. The following provisions shall guide the conduct of city employees in the event of an emergency or a hazardous inclement weather situation. 
(1)	Essential employees. All essential employees engaged in the protection of citizens and emergency services shall be required to report to work at their regular shift unless called in early by their immediate supervisor, the mayor, the city manager or the emergency management director. Essential officers and employees are defined as the city manager, constitutional officers, EMA director, all police personnel, dispatchers, emergency medical service providers, director of public works, building inspector, and all code enforcement personnel. 
(2)	Nonessential persons. The mayor or the city manager, in consultation with the EMA director, the police chief, and such other personnel as the city council may designate, shall decide whether to open the city hall and other city work facilities. It shall be their responsibility to notify city officers and employees if the city's offices are to be closed. If the city's offices are open, all employees in all offices are expected to report for their assigned shift. If the city's offices are not opened for business at the regular opening hour of 8:30 a.m., all employees are required to check in with the courthouse periodically for updates. Employees will not be paid for regular hours that the city's offices are not in operation. 
(3)	Employee pay. Any employee not able to report for his assigned shift may take annual leave for those hours. If an employee reports for work and is then sent home by the closing of the city's offices, the employee will be paid for the remainder of the day. The mayor or the city manager shall make the decision to close the city's offices. 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Secs. 30-19—30-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-40. - Adoption of minimum standards fire code. 
The city adopts by reference as if fully set forth herein, the minimum standards fire code, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20, and as published by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and identified as the most recently published edition of the International Fire Code, with any and all Georgia amendments and supplements to that code published by the state. 
Sec. 30-41. - Outdoor burning prohibited. 
No uncontained outdoor burning of leaves, trash, or other material is permitted within the geographical limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 589C, § 501.3, 10-10-1994) 
Chapter 34 - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 8, 2010, not being specifically amendatory, has been treated as superseding ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein codified. Former ch. 34 pertained to the same subject matter and carried no amendatory history. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and city council, of Ellaville, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 34-2. - Findings of fact. 
(1)	The flood hazard areas of Ellaville, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 34-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 34-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 34-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Ellaville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 34-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated May 20, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated May 20, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Schley County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at 55 Wilson St., Ellaville, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 34-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 34-8. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 34-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 34-10. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 34-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Ellaville, Georgia, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 34-12. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 360 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Ellaville, Georgia, from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 34-13. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning and zoning board's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 34-6. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 20, 2010 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 20, 2010 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(a)	Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)	Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(2)	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 20, 2010 (the effective date of the initial FIRM) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 20, 2010 (the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 20, 2010 (the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)	Built on a single chassis; 
(b)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 6) 
Secs. 34-14—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-21. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance [chapter]. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 34-22. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 34-32(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 34-23. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-6, then the city administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article III. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 34-22(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-22(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 34-22(1)c. and 34-32(2) or section 34-34(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 34-24—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-31. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 34-32. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-31(4), elevated buildings. 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 34-23(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (ref. section 34-31(6) above). 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 34-32(3)a. and c., above. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-6, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if section 34-32(4)a., above, is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article III. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 34-33. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-6, then the city administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article III. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions in subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-31(4), elevated buildings. 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 34-34. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-6, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 34-32. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 34-35. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-6, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 34-31(4), elevated buildings. The city administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water-tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 34-22(1)(c) and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 34-36. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 34-37. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 4, § G) 
Sec. 34-38. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board as established by mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the mayor and city council in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Schley County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section and section 34-39 are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 5, §§ A—G) 
Sec. 34-39. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)	A variance shall be issued only when there is a: 
(1)	Finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)	Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The city administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, Art. 5, §§ H, I) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to provide for the general health and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking of cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other tobacco products, and dipping of smokeless tobacco inside is prohibited in city hall and at the city center, including upon the grounds of both buildings. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001(1)) 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances and their abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-21. - Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to create, carry on, or maintain any nuisance that causes damage or inconvenience to any person within the city limits or that tends to injure or does injure or jeopardize the health of any people of the city. 
Sec. 38-22. - Person responsible for nuisance. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Living or business unit or establishment means that portion of all of a building or structure that constitutes a separate and undivided family or business concern. 
(b)	Generally. The owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed the party responsible for any nuisance occurring on his property. 
(c)	Multiunit buildings. If the property on which a nuisance exists includes a building containing between two and four living or business units or establishments, then the occupants of the living or business units or establishments shall be deemed the responsible party. 
(d)	Responsibility fixed by contract. If the lease or rental agreement or contract between the owner and the occupant specifically names the party responsible for the clearing or cutting of grass, weeds, or bushes, regardless of ownership and regardless of the number of living or business units or establishments on the premises, the specified party shall be held responsible for compliance with this section. 
Sec. 38-23. - Procedure for abatement. 
(a)	Notice to owner. For any public nuisance found to exist within the city, the designated city official shall give to the owner and any other responsible party not less than five days notice in writing, directing the abatement of the nuisance. If any person entitled to notice pursuant to this section is a nonresident of the city or state, then notice shall be provided to his agents within the city or state. 
(b)	Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city. If the nuisance has not been removed within ten days from the date of giving notice, then the city, through any officer or employee designated by the mayor, shall cause the nuisance to be abated. In abating the nuisance, the designated officer or employee is authorized to employ labor and purchase material to make repairs, changes, alternations, or eliminations. The cost of abatement shall be billed to the owner and all other responsible parties and shall be immediately payable to the city. 
(c)	Failure to pay cost of abatement. If the owner and any other responsible party fails to pay the costs charged by the city for abatement of the nuisance, then an execution shall be issued against the property owner or property, provided that notice herein described affords the property owner an opportunity to be heard before the mayor and council, or a designated committee thereof, as to the necessity of any such repairs, changes or elimination. The execution issuing hereunder shall be issued, enforced, and collected in the same manner as that provided by law for the execution of ad valorem taxes due to the city. 
Sec. 38-24. - Accumulation of junk prohibited. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, which is incorporated herein by reference, unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, or equipment and personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, which hereinafter are collectively described as said personalty, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby declared a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. 
Sec. 38-25. - Abatement of nuisance by owners. 
The owners, tenants, leasees or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which such storage is made, and also the owners or leasees of said personalty involved in such storage, all of whom are hereinafter referred to collectively as owners, shall jointly abate said nuisance by the prompt removal of said personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise to remove said personalty to a location without said corporate limits. 
Sec. 38-26. - Penalties for failure of owner to abate such nuisance. 
If the owners, tenants, leasees or occupants allow a nuisance to exist or fail to abate a nuisance after notice from the city as provided herein, they, and each of them, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-10. 
Sec. 38-27. - Abatement by city. 
(a)	Whenever said owners fail to abate said nuisance, then the city shall remove said personalty to a location of its selection, the expense thereof to be billed to said owners, jointly and severally, said bill to be recoverable in a suit of law. 
(b)	When said personalty has been removed and placed in storage by the city, as provided for herein, said personalty shall be sold by the city after the lapse of such time as is provided by law. If the proceeds of such sale are insufficient to pay the costs of abatement, said owners shall be liable to the city for the balance of the costs, jointly and severally, to be recoverable in a suit of law. If the proceeds are in excess of costs, the balance shall be paid to said owners, or deposited in the city treasury for the use of the owners. 
Sec. 38-28. - Open, dangerous wells, iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Living or business unit or establishment means that portion of all of a building or structure that constitutes a separate and undivided family or business concern. 
(b)	Owners must abate nuisance. The owners of all open and dangerous wells in the city must close in, cover, or otherwise abate said nuisances. Upon failure to do so, such nuisance shall be abated by authority of the mayor and council and the cost of abating the same collected from the owner. 
(c)	Unused iceboxes, refrigerators. Unused iceboxes, refrigerators, and similar articles which have locks or latches for keeping the doors thereof tightly closed and which are large enough to permit the entrance of small children are hereby declared to be nuisances and subject as such to abolishment unless the custodian thereof shall remove the locks, latches or other similar devices in such a manner as to permit such locks or latches from operating, unless such boxes and refrigerators are stored in a secure place in a manner as to prevent their being accessible to children. The removal of doors of such boxes, etc., shall be the equivalent of the removal of locks or latches. 
(d)	Persons responsible. The owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed the party responsible; provided, further, that if on said property, lot, building, or premise there exist a building containing four, or less than four living or business units or establishments, then the occupants of such living or business units or establishments shall be deemed the responsible party. If the lease or rental agreement or contract between the owner and the occupant specifically states or names the party responsible for the clearing or cutting of such grass, weeds, or bushes, whether he be the owner or occupant and regardless of the number of living or business units or establishments which the building or premises may contain, then such specified party shall be held responsible under this regulation. 
(e)	Notice to abate. Upon giving not less than five days' notice in writing to a person, or his agent, if the person creating or maintaining the nuisance are nonresidents of the city or of the state, if they have agents within the city or state, to abate the same; and if said nuisance within ten days after giving said notice is not abated, then the city, through any officer designated by the mayor shall abate said nuisance. The city, through such officer designated by the mayor, is authorized to employ labor and purchase material to make repairs, changes or eliminations, including the employment of labor and purchase of material, and do other things that may be necessary to abate said nuisance. In the event the costs of abating said nuisance are not paid, then an execution shall be issued against the property owner or property for the cost of the same; provided that notice herein described affords the property owner an opportunity to be heard before the mayor and council, or a designated committee thereof, as to the necessity of any such repairs, changes or elimination. The execution issuing hereunder shall be issued, enforced, and collected in the same manner as that provided by law for the execution of ad valorem taxes due to the city. 
Chapter 42 - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 42-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-32. - Purpose and intent. 
Groundwater is among the nation's most important natural resources. It provides drinking water to urban and rural communities, supports irrigation and industry, sustains the flow of streams and rivers, and maintains riparian and wetland ecosystems. In many areas of the nation, the future sustainability of ground-water resources is at risk from overuse and contamination. Because groundwater systems typically respond slowly to human actions, a long-term perspective is needed to manage this valuable resource. This article is intended to implement rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division known as the "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria" as they specifically relate to groundwater recharge areas (Rule 391-3-16-.02). It is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the public that the quality of subsurface public drinking water be maintained. Groundwater resources exist in underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface that are capable of providing water for a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface, known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when development occurs within groundwater recharge areas. Certain land use activities, such as septic tanks, underground tanks, and chemical spills, pose a significant threat to the quality of groundwater supplies. Therefore, it is necessary to manage land uses within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats and development impacts are minimized. To this end, this article establishes minimum lot sizes to provide for the orderly and safe development of property utilizing on-site sewage management systems. 

Recharge of Groundwater from Surface Water During Normal and Drought Conditions
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acre-foot means the volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover one acre to a depth of one foot. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or providing water for a well. 
DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Hydrologic Atlas 18 means a map prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1989, which identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils." 
Hydrologic Atlas 20 means a multicolored map of Georgia at a scale of 1:500,000, prepared by the Georgia DNR using the DRASTIC methodology and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey in 1992, which shows areas of high, average (or medium), and low susceptibility of groundwater to pollution in Georgia. This map is also commonly known as the Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Each significant recharge area shown on Hydrologic Atlas 18 is classified on Hydrologic Atlas 20 as high, medium, or low, and these classifications are relevant in this article. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the City of Ellaville. Each significant recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-34. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 18 by reference. 
Hydrologic Atlas 18, as defined by this article is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-35. - Adoption of Hydrologic Atlas 20 by reference. 
Hydrologic Atlas 20, as defined by this article is hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-36. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the City of Ellaville that are mapped as significant recharge areas as defined by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-37. - Permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the land use or building conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the land use officer shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-38. - County health department approval of permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a building, structure, or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank, unless the local health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR Manual) and this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-39. - Minimum lot size. 
Within an area governed by this article, new homes or land uses served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum lot sizes as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in Sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department. 
(1)	One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)	One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)	One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this section. Within an area governed by this article, no subdivision plat shall be recorded until and unless said plat has been reviewed and approved by the land use officer as being in compliance with the minimum lot sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-40. - Mobile home parks. 
Within an area governed by this article, new mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum areas in square feet as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors set forth in Sections A—F of the DHR Manual, as determined by the local health department. 
(1)	One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)	One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Within an area governed by this article, no site plan for a mobile home park or manufactured home park shall be considered valid until and unless said site plan has been reviewed and approved by the land use officer as being in compliance with the minimum space sizes established by this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-41. - Agricultural waste impoundment sites. 
New agricultural waste impoundment sites in a significant recharge area, as specified below, shall contain a liner consisting of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service: 
(1)	Any agricultural waste impoundment site located in a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)	Any agricultural waste impoundment site within an average or medium pollution susceptibility area which exceeds 15 acre-feet; or 
(3)	Any agricultural waste impoundment site within a low pollution susceptibility area that exceeds 50 acre-feet. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-42. - Above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks. 
Within an area governed by this article, new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks having a minimum volume of 660 gallons shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-43. - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
Within an area governed by this article, new facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local or applicable state fire code requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-44. - Stormwater infiltration basins. 
Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in significant recharge areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Secs. 42-45—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 42-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-62. - Purpose and intent. 
Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the well-being of communities in the State of Georgia. Nationally, a considerable number of wetlands have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other activities. Without additional regulation, piecemeal or cumulative losses of wetlands will continue to occur over time. Therefore, it is in the interest of public safety and general welfare to avoid damage or destruction to wetlands. The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection by adopting a generalized wetlands map; provide for the withholding of land use and building permits in areas designated as wetlands until a jurisdictional wetland determination is completed; and establish permitted and prohibited land uses within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-63. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means a map of wetlands provided in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) map showing wetlands within the City of Ellaville. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas (see Figure). The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 

Types of Wetlands
Source: Tiner and Burke, 1995, http://www.mde.state.md.us/wetlands/wwr/Figure2w.htm 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-64. - Adoption of generalized wetlands map by reference. 
The generalized wetlands map, as defined by this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference, and hereby made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-65. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all lands within the City of Ellaville that are shown on the Generalized Wetlands Map, as defined by this article, as wetlands. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-66. - Permit required. 
No land use permit or building permit shall be issued by the land use officer for a land use, building, structure, or manufactured home, nor shall any regulated activity as defined by this article commence, unless the land use, building, structure, manufactured home or regulated activity conforms to the requirements of this article. Prior to a land use permit or building permit being issued, the land use officer shall require a site plan or subdivision plat in sufficient detail to review the proposed development for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-67. - Jurisdictional wetland determination required. 
If an area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetland as shown on the generalized wetlands map, as determined by the land use officer, no local land use permit or building permit on said wetland shall be issued until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occur: 
(1)	The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a section 404 permit is required, and either a section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued by the corps for the proposed development; or 
(2)	The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-68. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)	Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)	Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)	Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)	The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)	Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 42-69. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
(1)	Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)	Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Law enforcement generally, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-11—46-18. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICY AND STRUCTURE 

Sec. 46-19. - Flexibility and stability of organization. 
The ability of the department to make organizational adjustments to meet changing needs is essential in obtaining the maximum benefit from the expenditure of assigned resources; however, to ensure stability, the basic department structure should not be changed in the absence of the demonstrated need or to satisfy temporary requirements. There must be continuing staff inspections to ensure those departments' organizational needs are being met. In addition, each commanding officer has the responsibility to maintain the organizational viability of his command through constant evaluation. 
Sec. 46-20. - Chain of command; accountability. 
Any organization, including a law enforcement agency, cannot function without an organizational structure that assigns responsibilities or functions to specific individuals or groups of individuals. Each person employed by the department is responsible for certain functions and tasks. Additionally, each employee is held accountable for those tasks for which he is responsible. The function of an employee holding supervisory responsibilities is to see that people under his control are performing the tasks assigned to them. 
Sec. 46-21. - Function areas of department. 
The city police department functions in three areas: uniform patrol, criminal investigation, and administrative services. Each area has distinct activities that are interrelated. Tasks are assigned to each area as provided in the department's operations manual. 
Sec. 46-22. - Chief of police. 
(a)	Duties. The chief of police will be the executive officer of the department and shall be responsible to the chief administrative officer of the city for the proper administration of departmental affairs. The chief of police shall formulate department policies and see that the rules and regulation and all general and special orders are understood and enforced. The department operates under the direct supervision of the chief of police. 
(b)	Court docket; receipts. The court clerk is to maintain the municipal court docket along with supporting records. All collected fines and bond forfeitures will be evidenced by a court docket receipt. This receipt will be signed by the clerk when receiving the funds from that court. The court docket receipt will then be filled with the chief of police. 
(c)	Maintaining police station. It shall be the duty of the police chief to manage and maintain the police station. He shall see that said premises are kept in a clean and neat condition at all times. 
Sec. 46-23. - Acting chief of police. 
The chief of police shall so regulate his office that when he is absent from the city, or unable to attend to the duties of his office, the department shall be under the command of an acting chief of police. Such acting chief of police shall be regarded as the representative of the chief of police and his commands obeyed. 
Sec. 46-24. - Speed traps. 
It is contrary to the policy of the department to engage in any practices resembling speed traps or luring persons into violations of the law. Such activities are not only unfair to the public, but arouse a direct resentment against law enforcement authorities and discredits the individuals concerned and the department permitting the same. 
Secs. 46-25—46-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 46-52. - Duty to check doors. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to check all front and rear doors of all business establishments in the city at least twice each night. 
Sec. 46-53. - Record of arrests required. 
When a police officer makes an arrest, he shall make a record thereof and report the same to the chief of police. 
Sec. 46-54. - Seizure of property. 
No officer shall seize any property or merchandise except for self-protection, or when such property may be valuable as evidence in the successful completion of a case. Officers shall turn seized property over to the chief of police and receive a receipt in duplicate, one copy being filed in police headquarters. 
Sec. 46-55. - Improperly releasing prisoners. 
After the police make an arrest and the defendant is placed in jail, it shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine as a contempt of the court for the police to release said prisoner without having brought the prisoner before the court for proper action or a bond with security having been made for his appearance. Otherwise, no prisoners shall be released from jail or the case dismissed by the police except on the expressed order of the presiding official of the court. 
Sec. 46-56. - Chief and police officers to remain in city while on duty. 
In no case shall the chief of police absent himself from the city during his hours of duty for any length of time, unless he has the consent of the mayor. No police officer shall absent himself from the city during his hours of duty unless he has the express permission and consent of the chief of police. 
Sec. 46-57. - Police officers and vehicles to remain at headquarters. 
At all times when on duty, but not actually patrolling, police officers and police vehicles shall remain at police headquarters. 
Sec. 46-58. - Knowledge of law required. 
Police officers, upon their employment, shall acquaint themselves with laws and ordinances of the city, and all other laws and regulations concerned with their work in law enforcement. 
Sec. 46-59. - Political activity. 
Active participation in political elections of any nature is prohibited for members of the police department. This section shall not be construed as compromising any individual's right to vote for any candidate of his choice for any elective office, city, county, state or federal. Any member of the department found to be engaged in the solicitation of voters or support for any candidate, or participation in any activities for or against the passage of any issue, or election of any candidate, shall be subject to suspension or dismissal. 
Sec. 46-60. - Intoxicants. 
No officer of the police department shall, while on duty and subject to call, drink any beer, wine or intoxicating beverage. Any member found in violation of this rule will be immediately dismissed from the service. 
Sec. 46-61. - Personal conduct. 
No officer shall exhibit anger, ill feeling, or desire for revenge, or use any profane or vulgar language in the performance of his duty. No officer shall engage in an altercation with another member of the police department, or with any other law enforcement officer, whether on or off duty, nor engage in any conversation likely to provoke an argument. 
Sec. 46-62. - Critical comment regarding officers and officials. 
Officers or other members of the department shall not criticize the work manner or performance of duties, or the personal actions or habits of other members of the police department. Any failure to perform duties, or wrongful acts or habits, shall be reported in writing to the chief of police. No officer or other member or the department shall criticize the work, manner of performance of duties or the personal actions or habits of officers of their or other departments, city attorneys, judges, or other public officials. Gossiping among members of this department concerning higher authority or any individual or anything pertaining to official business of the department, will be cause for disciplinary action. 
Sec. 46-63. - Frequenting disreputable places. 
No officer shall, while on duty, or when in uniform or wearing any part of the uniform that might identify him as a member of the police department, loiter in any place where beer, wine, or intoxicating liquors are sold or any place having such reputation, nor shall any officer enter a disreputable place unless required to do so in connection with his enforcement duties. 
Sec. 46-64. - Confidential communications. 
No officer or employee shall communicate with any person other than a member of the department any information relating to any service in which he is or has been engaged, or relating to any departmental business without permission of a superior officer, unless in obedience to other lawful authority after service of a subpoena. The foregoing rule shall also apply to news releases or other information to the press. 
Sec. 46-65. - Alertness to duty. 
Within his proper jurisdiction, no officer shall overlook any opportunity to perform his duty by making an arrest or give a warning to a violator or offering aid or information to persons in need, according to the policy of the department. 
Sec. 46-66. - Gratuities; solicitations. 
No officer shall receive or accept any present, fee or other reward for his services other than his regular salary, except as authorized by law. No officer shall request any person other than his superiors in the organization, to intervene or make representation in his behalf to secure his promotion or for any purpose related to his work, nor shall an officer solicit subscriptions, sign or circulate petitions. 
Sec. 46-67. - Borrowing vehicles. 
The practice of borrowing cars from dealers and garage men, and courting special favors, is strictly forbidden. 
Sec. 46-68. - Endorsements. 
No officer shall recommend or favor any garage, repair shop, insurance or other business to persons whom they contact in the line of duty, nor shall any officer furnish to any person any testimonial or endorsement of any product or equipment. 
Sec. 46-69. - Outside occupations. 
No officer shall engage in any business, occupation or profession that, in the opinion of the chief of police would affect or interfere with such officer's proper performance of his duty or be detrimental to his services to the department. 
Sec. 46-70. - Violations of law. 
Any officer who violates the laws of the commonwealth and is so charged shall be turned over to civil authorities. Should such person be found guilty of such charge, the officer will be dropped from the payroll of the police department. 
Sec. 46-71. - Making arrest for personal reasons. 
The making of any arrest for an act growing out of a personal argument on the part of the officer, or a quarrel in which any member of his family is involved, is forbidden. 
Sec. 46-72. - Disobedience; insubordination. 
Willful disobedience of an order issued verbally or in writing by the chief of police will be sufficient grounds for drastic disciplinary action or dismissal. Insubordination shall be any manifested resistance, physical or mental, to authority and shall be grounds for severe disciplinary action or dismissal. 
Sec. 46-73. - Smoking. 
Smoking is permissible, except when in the performance of official duties, while talking with a motorist, directing traffic, or in any place where it does not become an officer to do so. 
Sec. 46-74. - Report of injury. 
Any officer receiving an injury while on duty shall immediately report such incident to his immediate superior, and forward a report, in writing, to the chief of police within 24 hours. 
Sec. 46-75. - Surrender of property upon suspension. 
In all cases of suspension from duty, the suspended officer shall immediately surrender his badge, identification certificate and such other city property in his possession at the time of the suspension. During the period of suspension, the suspended officer shall not wear any part of the uniform of the police department. 
Sec. 46-76. - Uniforms. 
(a)	Generally. All officers shall wear the prescribed uniforms and equipment at all times when on duty, unless otherwise ordered by a superior officer. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed at all times. Footwear shall be kept in a neat and tidy condition. Any worn or damaged items of the uniform shall be replaced immediately upon the approval of the chief of police and purchasing agent. Shirts and blouses shall be kept buttoned, also pockets/flaps. No fraternal or other insignia shall be worn on the uniform except that are designated by the chief of police exemplifying, E.M.T. training, firearms, military, scholastic, police honors, etc. Pencils shall be kept in the pocket provided for that purpose. Notebooks, letters, and other papers shall be kept concealed. 
(b)	Fulltime officers. Each fulltime officer shall be issued five uniform shirts, with badge, nameplate, collar insignias, whistle, snake chain of appropriate season and color, five uniform pants, one uniform headgear with badge and accessories. Uniform leather will be basket weave type. Each fulltime officer shall also be issued one underbelt, one equipment belt, four belt keepers, one key holder with departmental keys, one security holster with .45 cal. semi-automatic Glock, cuff case with handcuffs, walkie talkie and case, flashlight and baton holder, double magazine case with magazines fully loaded, one ballistic vest, uniform raincoat, uniform. At season change, five uniform shirts are to be issued, e.g., winter long-sleeve with two ties and tie tack, one winter jacket. 
(c)	Parttime officers. Each parttime officer shall be issued two uniform shirts, with badge, nameplate, collar insignias, whistle, snake chain of appropriate season and color, two uniform pants, and any other equipment available in departmental inventory. 
Sec. 46-77. - Use of city vehicles. 
(a)	License required. Vehicle operators to be licensed. No officer of the police department or member of the department shall operate a motor vehicle without the proper license. 
(b)	Speeding. An officer while on patrol will travel at a rate of speed not to exceed 25 miles per hour, except when in pursuit of an automobile or in an emergency. Officers will observe the speed laws of all towns and cities, except in cases of extreme emergencies. 
(c)	Responsibility for damages. Officers to whom a motor vehicle is assigned will be held responsible for such motor vehicle and its equipment in its entirety. Where investigation shows that the damage to such vehicle was caused by negligence or in violation of state laws, the officer to whom such vehicle is assigned will be held responsible, and he will be responsible, and he will be required to repair or replace damaged parts at his own expense. 
(d)	Refueling. When a patrol car comes in from regular patrol or an emergency call, the driver will, immediately upon checking in at the station, refuel the gasoline tank and check the oil and water. 
(e)	Transporting females. No female person, other than a female police officer, shall be transported in any patrol car unless such person is under arrest, or has been injured in an accident or fight, is suffering from an illness and is being taken to a hospital or medical aid, or is a witness for the city in a trial. Otherwise, permission must be obtained from the chief of police. 
Sec. 46-78. - Hours of duty. 
Officers of the police department are subject to call for duty at any hour or for any emergency, and shall promptly respond to such calls from their superior officers. Officers shall work in such areas at such hours and on such services as may be assigned to them, and while on duty they shall not leave their respective posts, except in an emergency or upon specific instructions from a superior officer. 
Sec. 46-79. - Absence from duty. 
No officer shall be absent from duty without permission, and any officer who is unable to go on duty due to sickness or for other reasons shall immediately notify or cause the next higher authority to be notified accordingly. 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Conflict of regulations. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
Sec. 50-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Manufactured home shall have the meaning provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160. 
Mobile home means a manufactured home as defined herein. 
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient uses. 
Mobile home stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of one mobile home unit. 
Park management means the person who owns or has charge, care or control of the mobile home park. 
Park street means a street which affords principal means of access to mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent public street. 
Service building means a structure provided by the park management for nonresidential uses as a convenience to park occupants. 
Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances between the drain outlet of a mobile home and the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile home park. 
Sewer riser pipe means that portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot. 
Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances between the water inlet pipe of the mobile home and the outlet of the corresponding water riser pipe of the water supply system serving the mobile home park. 
Water riser pipe means that portion of the water supply system which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot. 
Secs. 50-3—50-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 50-23. - Authority of city clerk. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe applications, moving permit, and location decal forms, and thereafter to alter and change the same, and said city clerk is empowered to require that applicants furnish the information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purpose hereof. 
Sec. 50-24. - Utility services withheld pending compliance. 
(a)	No utility services shall be provided to any mobile or manufactured home until the home is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the city building department has issued a certificate of occupancy as provided herein. 
(b)	The building official is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 110 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary installation of the mobile home or manufactured home. This provision specifically does not authorize permanent power hookup or occupancy of the mobile home or manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of said home. 
Sec. 50-25. - Minimum requirements. 
No mobile home or manufactured home shall be moved into or relocated for permanent or temporary occupancy unless: 
(1)	Moving permit. The owner, mover, or hauler has obtained a moving permit from the office of the county tax commissioner. 
(2)	Age of home. The home is less than ten years old. 
(3)	Approved site. The home must be positioned on a site approved by the city's building department, evidenced by a building permit, as provided herein. 
(4)	Construction standards. The home complies with the minimum construction and installation standards of this chapter and with all applicable state, county, and city building and zoning regulations. 
(5)	Wastewater connection. The home has been approved for connection to the city wastewater system or has been issued a septic tank permit by the appropriate county officials. 
(6)	Building permit and certificate of occupancy. The city building department has issued a building permit for installation of the home, and final inspection and approval of the home and the installation of the home has resulted in issuance by the city of a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)	Mobile home decal. The county tax commissioner has issued a mobile home decal, as provided herein. 
(8)	Fees and taxes. All applicable permit and inspection fees, and all applicable taxes, have been paid in full. 
Sec. 50-26. - Minimum construction and installation standards. 
Each newly installed mobile home or manufactured home in the city shall conform to the minimum construction standards and the minimum installation standards provided by: 
(1)	The U.S. Housing and Urban Development, as set forth in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
(2)	Chapter 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as promulgated by the Georgia Office of the Commissioner of Insurance Safety Fire division. 
(3)	The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 
Sec. 50-27. - Moving permit required. 
No mover, hauler, person, or other entity shall move a mobile home or manufactured home to any location beyond the limits of the lot or parcel of land upon which it presently is located, or upon which it was originally located, without first obtaining a moving permit from the county tax commissioner authorizing the relocation. 
Sec. 50-28. - Building permit required. 
Any person desiring to locate or relocate an approved mobile or manufactured home within the city must obtain a building permit from the city building department. Application for the building permit shall be made on the form provided by the building department and shall be accompanied by such documentation as the building department may require, including, but not limited to, a septic tank permit issued by the appropriate county authority as provided herein. The application shall also be accompanied by a building permit fee in the amount established by the city council. 
Sec. 50-29. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued indicating compliance with all applicable codes before any person is authorized to occupy any newly installed mobile home or manufactured home. Following installation of the mobile or manufactured home pursuant to a validly issued building permit, the city building department shall make final inspection to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Final inspection shall include, but not be limited to, inspection of the plumbing, electrical, and gas installations, the foundation, and all stairs and landings. Upon successful final inspection, the building department shall issue a certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city building department unless a valid septic tank permit, if applicable, and decal have been issued as provided herein. 
Sec. 50-30. - Septic tank permit required. 
If a mobile or manufactured home is approved for relocation to a site having city water and wastewater available, an approved connection to city services shall be obtained as provided in this Code. If city services are not available at the approved installation site, the owner shall obtain a septic tank permit from the appropriate county authorities. No building permit shall be issued by the city unless the home is approved for connection to city water and wastewater system or until a septic tank permit is issued by the county. 
Sec. 50-31. - Decal required. 
Every person or other entity holding title to or possessing a mobile home or manufactured home that is moved into or relocated within the limits of the city, shall, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, report the location of and obtain a location decal for the mobile home or manufactured home. Thereafter, decals must be renewed annually, no later than the date specified by the county tax commissioner. Decals are obtained from the office of the county tax commissioner. No decal shall be issued by the county tax commissioner unless all applicable fees and taxes have been paid. 
Sec. 50-32. - Location of modular housing units. 
All modular housing units placed in the R-1 zoning district must be placed parallel to the street on which they are situated with the front of the unit facing the street. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2001(2)) 
Sec. 50-33. - Additional administrative procedures. 
The planning commission is authorized to establish other administrative procedures so the regulations can be more effectively and consistently applied. The zoning administrator is authorized to address situations where the ordinance does not indicate a procedure, provided the planning commission at the next regular meeting ratifies the action. 
Sec. 50-34. - Standards for installation of preowned manufactured homes. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
(1)	Applicant means any person seeking to install a preowned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Ellaville. 
(2)	Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants. 
(3)	Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a preowned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this section, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
(4)	Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs, required by subsections (c)(1)a. and b. of this section, reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the preowned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
(5)	Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
(6)	Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the City of Ellaville, Georgia. 
(7)	Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. 
(8)	Preowned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(b)	Conditions. All preowned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(c)	Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A permit shall be required to locate a preowned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(1)	Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.	An affidavit signed by the applicant that the preowned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
b.	Photographs of the interior and exterior of the preowned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of subsection (d) of this section; 
c.	A $10,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $10,000.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.	The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)	Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)	Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this section have been met. 
(3)	Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $250.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the preowned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $100.00 for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(4)	Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a preowned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(d)	Minimum health and safety standards. All preowned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)	HUD code. Every preowned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code. 
(2)	Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a preowned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)	Exterior condition. The exterior of all preowned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)	Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a preowned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)	Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)	Electrical systems. Switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc., shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each preowned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(7)	Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)	Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)	Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)	Smoke detectors. Each preowned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(e)	Enforcement. 
(1)	Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)	Owners of preowned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(3)	The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(f)	Penalties. Failure to remove a preowned manufactured home from the jurisdiction, upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy, shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.00. Each day any violation under this section continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2010, §§ 1—6) 
Secs. 50-35—50-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURED HOME AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 50-55. - Environmental protection. 
Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants of a mobile home park. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
Sec. 50-56. - Responsibilities of the park management. 
(a)	The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance with this article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)	The park management shall notify all park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(c)	The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. 
(d)	The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants identified by lot number or street address. The register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
(e)	The park management shall notify the health officer immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the park. 
Sec. 50-57. - Responsibilities of park occupants. 
(a)	The mobile home park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article and shall maintain the occupant's mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)	Pets, if permitted in the park, shall be prohibited to run at large or create any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home lot or street. 
(c)	Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions shall be installed only if permitted and approved by the park management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space immediately underneath a mobile home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the park management. If permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied: 
(1)	The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material. 
(2)	Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(3)	The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. The park occupant shall store and dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof, insectproof and watertight. 
Sec. 50-58. - Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. 
Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
Sec. 50-59. - Refuse handling. 
(a)	The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(b)	All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(c)	Refuse collection stands shall be provided on each mobile home lot for all refuse containers. The container stands shall be designed to prevent containers from being tipped. 
(d)	All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once weekly. Where suitable collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(e)	Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by burning in an approved incinerator or by transporting to a disposal site approved by the health officer. 
(f)	Refuse incinerators, if provided, shall be constructed in accordance with engineering plans and specifications which shall be reviewed and approved by the health officer. 
Sec. 50-60. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)	All grounds, buildings, structures, and storage areas in any mobile home park shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. 
(b)	The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage for ticks, chiggers, and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
Sec. 50-61. - Permits. 
(a)	Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city, unless the person holds a valid building permit approved by the building inspector. 
(b)	Application. Application for building permits required by this section shall contain the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)	The location and legal description of the mobile home park. 
(3)	A master plan similar to a subdivision plat of the proposed park, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.	The area and dimensions of the tract of land to be used for the proposed mobile home park. 
b.	The number, location and size of all existing and proposed mobile home lots. 
c.	The location and width of all existing and proposed street rights-of-way, pavements, widths, and walkways. 
(4)	Detailed plans and specifications including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.	Plans and specifications of the existing and proposed water supply and sewage disposal facilities, including the location of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines and riser pipes, as approved by the health officer; 
b.	The location and details of existing and proposed lighting and electrical systems; and 
c.	Plans and specifications for grading and storm drainage, as approved by the city engineer; provided, that where a mobile home park is to be developed by phases, complete engineering plans and specifications shall only be required as each phase is proposed for construction. All physical elements of future phases of the master plan, such as streets, mobile home lots or stands, buildings, recreation areas or other features, may be shown as proposed and subject to change as engineering, architectural or financial conditions warrant. 
(c)	Issuance. When, upon review of the application and approval by the health officer and the city engineer, the building inspector is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this article, a permit shall be issued. 
Sec. 50-62. - Permanent occupancy of recreational vehicles. 
No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied nor connected to water or electrical power, and no mobile home or manufactured home location permits shall be issued by the county clerk for recreational vehicles located within the city. For the purpose of this section, any recreational vehicle occupied for less than 90 days shall be considered nonpermanent and temporary, and any occupancy of 90 days or greater shall be considered permanent. All recreational vehicles must display a current county permit before movement. This shall apply to all recreational vehicles regardless of location, including locations within approved recreational vehicle parks. 
Sec. 50-63. - Mobile home or manufactured home park regulations. 
All mobile or manufactured home parks hereafter developed shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)	Site plan approval required. All mobile or manufactured home park developments shall require site plan approval by the city council. 
(2)	Location and frontage. A mobile or manufactured home park district development shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)	Street requirements. Interior roads serving the development are required and shall be suitably drained and have a minimum pavement width of 22 feet plus four feet of drainage area on both sides of the road, for a total road width of 30 feet. If dedicated to the public, the roads within the development shall meet the same requirements as required for subdivision roads and streets. 
(4)	Lot area and width. A mobile or manufactured home park development shall have a minimum area of ten contiguous acres and a lot width of at least 200 feet. Each lot space within the park shall have a minimum of 14,000 square feet and shall have not less than 50 feet of frontage on the interior road. 
(5)	Recreation and other community facilities. Not less than ten percent of the total area of the development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities for those mobile or manufactured homes parks containing ten acres or 25 units. 
(6)	Setbacks required. No mobile or manufactured home or other building or structure shall be located closer than 60 feet to any mobile or manufactured home park perimeter property boundary. Each mobile or manufactured home shall be setback from the front lot line and any other mobile or manufactured home by at least 60 feet. 
(7)	Perimeter buffer required. A buffer at least 60 feet in width shall be provided and maintained around the entire exterior perimeter of the mobile or manufactured home park. 
(8)	Lightning. All mobile or manufactured home parks shall have lighting at appropriate height, spacing and intensity so that each mobile or manufactured home site's access and parking is appropriately illuminated. Mercury vapor halogen or low pressure sodium lights that are placed at not less than 500 feet intervals with a minimum height of 18 feet. 
(9)	Utilities. All mobile or manufactured home parks shall be served by water and public sewer systems and shall be subject to approval by the city. 
(10)	Parking. Two spaces per dwelling unit plus one space for each resident manager and additional spaces for visitor parking. All parking spaces as well as walkways shall be of concrete or a pavement substance. 
(11)	Swimming pools. In the event that a swimming pool is developed or planned as a part of the park, a chainlink, masonry or wood fence not less than six feet high with a locking gate shall enclose this facility. Swimming pools must comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, including building and zoning regulations. 
(12)	Park grounds. All park grounds shall be maintained with grass, trees or shrubs to enhance the appearance of the park and to prevent soil erosion or the creation of dust. 
(13)	Use by recreational vehicles limited. Ten percent of the lot spaces may be allocated for temporary use by recreational vehicles, the length of the use to be limited to 90 days per vehicle occupying any of the space in the park. 
(14)	Service buildings. Accessory structures and community service facilities are hereby permitted for the convenience and well-being of park residents. The structures may include, but are not limited to, the following uses: 
a.	Park management offices, repair shops, and storage. 
b.	Community sanitary facilities. 
c.	Community laundry facilities. 
d.	Community postal facilities. 
e.	Indoor community recreation areas. 
f.	Commercial uses supplying essential goods and services. 
(15)	Listing of mobile or manufactured homes required. Every person, or other entity owning or operating a mobile or manufactured home park, and each entity engaged in the sale or rental of mobile or manufactured homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax commissioner a complete list of all mobile or manufactured homes parked, rented or otherwise located upon the property of the entity or in a mobile or manufactured home park operated by the entity. 
(16)	Registration of park residents required. Park management must maintain a register of all park residents. The register must be available to any authorized person inspecting the park. 
Sec. 50-64. - Recreational vehicle park regulations. 
All recreational vehicle parks shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)	Site plan approval required. All recreational vehicle parks shall require site plan approval by the city council. 
(2)	Location and frontage. All recreational vehicle parks shall be located on property with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a public street. 
(3)	Street requirements. An interior road serving the development is required and shall be suitably graded, stabilized and covered with a dustfree material which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Said interior road shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. The exception being, the first 200 feet of the entrance road from the public street shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt. 
(4)	Lot area and width. The minimum land area of any recreational vehicle park shall be five contiguous acres. Each space within the park shall have a minimum area of not less than 2,000 square feet, and lot lines shall be clearly delineated. Lots may be set at an angle, set parallel to the street, or varied in other ways provided that the arrangement is approved as a part of site plan approval. Each lot within the park shall have a minimum of 25 feet of street frontage, and shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet. 
(5)	Utilities and improvements. 
a.	Each vehicle/camping space shall be equipped with a suitable and approved electrical outlet, a threaded potable water standpipe and faucet, and approved connection to the community sewer system, except at tent-only sites, a fire pit with permanent masonry or stone enclosure, a picnic-type table and a covered trash and garbage container. Garbage shall be removed daily from campsites. 
b.	All recreational vehicle parks must be equipped with men's and ladies' restrooms with toilet, shower and lavatories at a ratio of two fixtures for each sex per vehicle spaces, and a central sanitary dump station. Each recreational park must provide on-site public telephone access. 
(6)	Recreation facilities required. Parks designed to accommodate 15 or more recreational vehicles, campers, etc, shall provide one or more recreation areas. The size of the recreation area shall be based on a minimum of 200 square feet for each travel trailer space. No recreation area shall be smaller than 3,000 square feet and each shall be equipped for family activity. 
(7)	Service building permitted. Community service facilities and accessory structures are hereby permitted, subject to site plan approval, for the convenience of park patrons. The structures may include, but are not limited to, the following uses: 
a.	Park management offices. 
b.	Community laundry facilities. 
c.	Indoor community recreation areas. 
d.	Commercial uses supplying goods or services for the use of park patrons. 
Sec. 50-65. - Lot numbers. 
To make the provisions of this article effective, every operator of every mobile home park within the limits of the city shall devise a system of numbering the lots in the mobile home park operated by him in the manner that the lots are consecutively numbered in the fashion as will permit one seeking the location of a lot to find it with relative ease, and through means of a sign on each lot or other similar device, each lot shall be identified by number so that a person traversing the thoroughfares of the mobile home park by automobile will be able to identify any lot by number. 
Sec. 50-66. - Operator to maintain records. 
Every operator of a mobile home park within the limits of the city shall maintain records showing the given name and last name of each adult occupant of a mobile home located within the mobile home park so operated, and the operator shall maintain the records in a current manner so that at all times the records shall accurately reflect the name of each actual adult occupant. The records required may be maintained in one or more alternative fashions, as follows: 
(1)	If the mobile home park has an office located at the site of the park, the records prescribed may be maintained in the office, provided that the records shall be available for reference by any person legitimately entitled thereto including, but not limited to, law enforcement officers, 24 hours a day. 
(2)	If the mobile home park does not have an office open 24 hours a day, then and in that event, the records required hereby shall be maintained in the office of the sheriff of the city. 
(3)	The records need not be maintained in any particular form so long as they disclose the information required hereby. The records may consist of a plat of the mobile home park showing the lots by number upon which are listed the names of the adults occupying the lot, or the records may consist of a list of the names of the occupants of the mobile home park alphabetically with an indication of the lot number upon which the mobile home occupied by them may be found or it may be a listing of lots by number showing the names of the adult occupants thereof. At a minimum, however, the records shall be such as will enable one inspecting them to determine the given and last names of every adult occupant of every mobile home in the park with a reference to the number of the lot upon which the mobile home occupied by them is located. 
Sec. 50-67. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Upon violation of this article, the city building department or its designee shall notify the owner of the property on which the violation is found by certified mail, sent to the address of the property owner as it appears in tax information. If the owner of the mobile or manufactured home is different from the property owner, the violation notice shall also be sent by certified mail to the owner of the mobile or manufactured home. In case no valid mailing address can be obtained, or if the certified mail is returned, the notice of violation may be hand delivered to the person deemed responsible for said violation. 
(b)	The notice of violation shall clearly state the nature of the violation, including specific provisions of this article which have not been complied with, and the date upon which said violations will be remedied. Said date will be determined by the zoning administrator based on the nature and extent of the violation, but in no case shall exceed 30 days from the date the certified mail was received, the date upon which said violations will be remade shall not exceed 30 days from the date of delivery. 
(c)	The city building department is authorized to issue stop work orders in any instance where a violation of this article is found. The procedure for issuance of stop work orders shall be the same as the notification procedure for violations as specified herein. 
(d)	If, after notice, the violator fails to remedy the violation within the specified time period, or in cases where stop work orders have not been fully complied with, the city building department shall issue a citation requiring appearance in the municipal court. The citation shall include any and all violations found by the building department. 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS, PROPERTY, AND PUBLIC ORDER 

Sec. 54-19. - Contemptuous or disorderly conduct toward mayor and council. 
Any person guilty of contemptuous or disorderly conduct towards the mayor and city council, or in their presence, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $50.00, or confinement not to exceed 20 days. 
Sec. 54-20. - Abiding by the lawful instructions. 
Individuals are required to abide by the lawful instructions given by police officers, code enforcement officer, or other city official (city manager, city attorney, city clerk). 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001(3)) 
Sec. 54-21. - Disorderly conduct; acts constituting. 
(a)	A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person, within the corporate limits of the city, commits any of the following: 
(1)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of, or in fear of their safety, life, limb or health; 
(2)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Endangers or interferes with the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm; 
(4)	Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or of public property; 
(5)	Assembles or congregates with another or others and causes, provokes or engages in any fight or brawl; 
(6)	Collects in bodies or in crowds and engages in unlawful activities; 
(7)	Assembles or congregates with another or others and engages or attempts to engage in gaming; 
(8)	Frequents any public place and obtains money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempts to do so; 
(9)	Assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain or attempt to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person; 
(10)	Utters, in a public place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets; 
(11)	Frequents any place or vehicle where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(12)	Uses "fighting words" directed towards any person, causing said person to become outraged and thus creating turmoil; 
(13)	Assembles or congregates with another or others and does bodily harm to another or the property of another or public property; 
(14)	By acts of violence or threats thereof, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(15)	Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(16)	Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition; 
(17)	Appears in public in an intoxicated state or condition, whether said intoxication is by alcohol and/or drugs; 
(18)	Exposes any part of his or her body in an indecent or lewd manner; 
(19)	Creates loud noises, by and in any manner, which disrupts, disturbs, or otherwise interferes with the peace and tranquility of the public; 
(20)	Attempts to hinder, delay, obstruct or prevent any law enforcement officer from performing their duty; 
(21)	Keeps a disorderly house or house of ill fame; all adults residing in the house shall be considered its keeper; 
(22)	Lingers or loiters along public sidewalks, streets or public ways of the city; 
(23)	Fails or refuses to remove themselves from the private property of another when requested to do so by the owner or occupant(s) thereof; 
(24)	Either alone or in concert with others, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or depriving the owner of possession thereof (or the value thereof) in whole or in part, conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise from a retail establishment, alters the price tag or other price marking of goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment, or wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise, where the property or value thereof is $300.00 or less; 
(25)	Commits such words, acts or conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which, under ordinary circumstances, will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility or decorum, scandalize the community, shock the public sense or morality, or cause a detriment to the health and welfare of the community; or 
(26)	Appears in a public place or in view of the public wearing pants, shorts, or a skirt more than three inches below the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin, undergarments or underwear. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "underwear" shall include any article of clothing worn under the outer garments and next to the skin. At the discretion of the officer, any person violating this subsection may be warned to pull up their pants, and if they comply, said warning shall be the only penalty for violation of this subsection. 
(b)	Continued conduct. Continuation of the disorderly conduct constitutes additional offenses, and each day that the disorderly conduct continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(c)	Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2013) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 54-22. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Resist means any act of whatever kind and nature designed to prevent the effecting of a lawful arrest. 
(b)	Unlawful act. It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer of the city who, at the time of encountering resistance, shall be in the act of making, or attempting to make, a lawful arrest of such person. 
State Law reference— Obstruction of officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 54-23. - Throwing stones, other missiles. 
No person shall pitch, throw, or cast any stone or missile at or upon any house, window, lamp, electric light or telephone poles or fixtures, or shade trees in said city. 
Sec. 54-24. - Indecent exposure. 
Any person found in a state of nudity, or making any indecent exposure of his body or part or portion of his body shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 54-25. - Impersonating police officers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not being a police officer in the city, to assume to act, or to act as or represent himself as a police officer. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 54-26. - Theft by shoplifting. 
A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriation merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)	Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)	Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)	Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)	Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; 
(5)	Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
State Law reference— Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Sec. 54-27. - Penalty for theft by shoplifting. 
When the property that was the subject of the theft is $100.00 or less in value, the theft shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; provided, however, that: 
(1)	Upon the first conviction, the defendant is to be fined not more than $100.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)	Upon conviction of a second such offense, in addition to or in lieu of any imprisonment which might be imposed, the defendant shall be fined not less than $250.00 and the fine shall not be suspended or probated, and any other violations of this section hereafter are to be prosecuted in superior court. 
Sec. 54-28. - Penalty for possession of one ounce of marijuana or less. 
Anyone convicted of possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be fined not less than $300.00 or more than $500.00, or be punished by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof. 
Sec. 54-29. - Vagrancy. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, having no apparent means of subsistence, to neglect to apply himself to some honest and legitimate calling, or to be found habitually loitering about said city, or tramping from house to house through the city in quest of clothing or any other thing to the annoyance of the citizens and to the detriment of the peace and good order of the city. It is hereby made the duty of the police officers to arrest all vagrants and to take them before the proper authority, to be dealt with according to law. 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 54-30. - Damaging, defacing park property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the walks laid out in any public park and trespass upon the grass, or to deface any of the seats, fountains or other property therein, or to cut or whittle thereon with a knife or other instrument, or to write or mark thereon with a pen, pencil or other instrument, or to cut or injure any of the shade trees in said park. 
Sec. 54-31. - Damaging, defacing public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, break, or destroy any of the property of the city. 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 54-32. - Damaging, interfering with poles, wires, other fixtures. 
Anyone in the act of removing trees, tree limbs or anything that in anyway causes damage to city property, electric lines, poles, meters or lights, water lines, water meters or sewer lines, shall pay for any damages resulting from his actions. 
Sec. 54-33. - Posting signs on posts, trees, poles. 
It shall be unlawful to tack, nail or otherwise place any signs on posts, trees, or poles located on city property, and city rights-of-way, including all easements and other types of ownership. 
State Law reference— Placement of posters, signs, and advertisements on public or private property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
Sec. 54-34. - Discharging firearms, other weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or gun, including an air rifle, outside of his home and off his premises, on the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
Secs. 54-35—54-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 

Sec. 54-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in local parentis to a juvenile. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Guardian means any person other than a parent, who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. The term "public place" shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above. 
Sec. 54-58. - Curfew imposed. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll or play in any public place either on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in any vehicle, in, about or upon any place in the city during curfew hours. 
Sec. 54-59. - Responsibility of owners of public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors during curfew hours. 
Sec. 54-60. - Responsibility of parent or guardian. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or by inefficient control to allow such person to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place within the city during curfew hours. 
Sec. 54-61. - Exceptions; defenses. 
(a)	It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the minor was: 
(1)	Accompanied by his parent or guardian; 
(2)	On an errand at the direction of the parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)	In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)	Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency; 
(6)	On the sidewalk abutting his residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the child's presence; 
(7)	Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, the county, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the child, or going to or returning from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, the county, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)	Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)	Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(b)	It is a defense to prosecution of an owner, operator, or employee of a business establishment under this article if the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
Sec. 54-62. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Warning; notice to parent or guardian. Any police officer upon finding a minor in violation of this article shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor that he is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report such action to the chief of police who in turn shall notify the parents, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. 
(b)	Detention. If such minor refuses to heed such warning or direction by any police officer or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, or if the minor has been warned on a previous occasion that he is in violation of curfew, he shall be taken to the police department and parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities. 
Chapter 58 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 58-19. - Required, application, investigation. 
No person, except duly organized charitable organizations, shall be allowed to solicit within the city without first having obtained a permit from the mayor and council after making written application to the mayor and council stating the nature and purpose of such solicitation. The city may appoint any person to investigate and advise the mayor and council as to the necessity or need for said permit. 
Sec. 58-20. - Denial or issuance of solicitors' permits, violations. 
Upon authorization, after due hearing, the mayor and council has the right to grant or refuse a solicitors' permit. Should said permit be refused and such persons solicit after refusal of said permit, it shall be a violation of this Code. Each solicitation shall be a separate and distinct offense and punishable as a separate violation. 
Sec. 58-21. - Application; fees. 
Application for a solicitors permit shall be made at the office of the city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by the city council. 
Chapter 62 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL REVIEW BOARD 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Formal grievance means a written complaint made by an employee concerning the interpretation of these rules and regulations, departmental work rules, or disciplinary action affecting his employment with the city. 
Grievance and appeal procedure means the procedure that provides review and reconsideration of a decision that adversely affects a permanent employee. 
Permanent employee is an employee with six or more months continuous employment. 
Sec. 62-38. - Composition of board; chairman. 
The personnel review board shall be comprised of three persons appointed by the mayor each year and shall include one councilmember, one city administrative person and one local citizen. The board shall be chaired by the member of the city council to assure standard hearing procedure. 
Secs. 62-39—62-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 62-65. - Initial informal grievance procedure. 
(a)	Review by immediate supervisor. An employee who has a problem or complaint should first attempt settlement through discussion with his immediate supervisor without undue delay. 
(b)	Review by councilmember-in-charge. If, after this discussion, the problem has not been satisfactorily resolved, the employee has the right to discuss it with the councilmember-in-charge, who should then attempt to mediate the complaint. Every effort should be made to find an acceptable solution by informal means. 
(c)	Employee's right to file formal grievance. If either the employee or immediate supervisor is not in agreement with the decision reached by discussion, the employee shall then have the right to file a formal grievance in writing. 
(d)	Consultation with mayor. The immediate supervisor must seek informal settlement through discussion with the mayor before having the right to file a formal grievance in writing. 
Sec. 62-66. - Formal grievance procedure. 
(a)	Submission to supervisor. A written grievance shall be presented to the employee's immediate supervisor, who shall render his decision in writing within five work days. If the immediate supervisor fails to provide acceptable resolution of the grievance, the employee may present the appeal in writing to his supervisor's councilmember-in-charge. Failure of the employee to take further action within five work days after receipt of the written decision of his superior, or within ten work days if no decision is rendered, will constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. 
(b)	Submission to councilmember-in-charge. The councilmember-in-charge shall discuss the grievance with the employee, his representative, if any, and other appropriate persons. The councilmember-in-charge shall render his decision in writing, within five work days after receiving the appeal. 
(c)	Submission to personnel review board. If the employee does not agree with the decision reached, or if the councilmember-in-charge fails to provide resolution of the grievance as outlined in subsection (b) of this section, he may present his appeal in writing to the personnel review board. Failure of the employee to take further action within five days after receipt of the written decision of the councilmember-in-charge, or within ten work days if no decision is rendered, will constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. 
(d)	Scheduling of hearing. Upon receiving a request for hearing, the board shall set a session date within five days. 
(e)	Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be administrative in nature. The board shall have the right to summon city employees as witnesses and to examine appropriate city records. The board shall secure all pertinent facts and shall inform the employee, in writing, of its decision and the supportive reasons within five working days following the hearing. 
(f)	Appeal to city council. If the employee does not agree with the decision reached, he may appeal in writing to the city council. The city council, upon receiving the grievance, shall discuss the grievance with the employee, his representatives, if any, and with other appropriate persons. The city council shall render a decision in writing within five work days after receiving the appeal. 
(g)	Judicial review. If the employee does not agree with this decision, he may request a court hearing. 
(h)	Closed hearings; representation. The employee shall have the right, at all levels, to a closed hearing and may be represented at any the hearings. 
Secs. 62-67—62-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 62-91. - Employee position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan that shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of the pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected city officials and the city manager are not city employees. 
Sec. 62-92. - City equipment and vehicles. 
(a)	Personal use prohibited. No city employees, other than designated personnel, will be allowed to drive city-owned vehicles home, or use city-owned vehicles or equipment for personal use. City-owned vehicles will not be used by employees to run personal errands, go to lunch, to the bank, or to the store. 
(b)	Assignment of vehicles; employee responsibility. A vehicle or equipment may be assigned to an employee to assist in the performance of his duties. The employee will be responsible for the general maintenance and upkeep of the vehicle or equipment. Any vehicle or equipment that is damaged by an employee, if the employee is found to be guilty of negligence or carelessness, the employee will be required to repair or pay for repairs of the vehicle or equipment. 
(c)	Driver's license requirements and driver assignments. All city employees must have and maintain a valid state of Georgia driver's license. Failure to do so will result in dismissal. The only exception to this rule will be identified handicapped employees. These employees can never drive a city vehicle. 
Sec. 62-93. - Tools; materials inventory. 
Employees will be responsible for lost tools or the breakage of tools or equipment assigned to them, except normal wear and tear. An inventory of all tools, equipment, and materials will be held as directed by the purchasing agent or higher authority at least once each quarter. 
Sec. 62-94. - Employee parking at utility plant. 
All city employees are responsible for adhering to the parking arrangement around the city utility plant. 
Sec. 62-95. - Physical examination. 
All city employees must be qualified as physically fit to perform assigned duties in order to be employed by the city. This applies to prospective employees and current employees. The cost for this examination will be paid by the city. 
Sec. 62-96. - Working hours. 
For all city employees assigned work stations other than city hall, working hours will be 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with a lunch hour from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m. Working hours for other employees will be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with a lunch hour from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m. These hours will be strictly adhered to by all employees. Any deviation without special permission will result in dismissal. 
Sec. 62-97. - Overtime. 
In order to maintain the current year budget, overtime must be used only for emergency situations, such as electrical failure after normal working hours and water leaks that must be repaired after normal working hours. To maintain budget status, designated employees are required to alternate Saturdays and Sundays for the purpose of routine checks on wells, lift stations, electrical stations and other equipment as needed. 
Sec. 62-98. - Tardiness. 
An employee is tardy or late for work if the employee reports for work eight or more minutes after the specified time to report. 
Sec. 62-99. - Absences. 
Any employee who fails to report for work for three or more consecutive days without prior approval or notification to the department head, shall be considered to have abandoned his position with the city, and shall no longer be considered employed. Absence for three or more days, with prior approval or notification, will require a doctor's statement if sickness is claimed. If sickness is not claimed, the absence shall be charged to annual leave (vacation); provided, however, that if the employee has no annual leave accrued or if the employee requests that the absence not to be charged to annual leave, then no payment will be made for this absence. An employee who habitually abuses the authorized leave policies shall be terminated at the discretion of the department head. 
Sec. 62-100. - Time keeping. 
(a)	Clocking in and out. Each employee is responsible for his own time card. Each employee will punch in at the start of each work period, and punch out at the end of each work period. Each employee must make certain that the date and time of entries on his time card are correct. 
(b)	Handwritten cards prohibited. Handwritten cards are not acceptable for any reason, even with the department head approval, except emergency call out of the electric department. There will be no pay for any time that the time clock is not used to report work hours, except emergency call out of the electric department. 
(c)	Clocking in or out for another employee. No employee is to punch in for another employee for any reason. If one employee punches in or out for another employee, both employees shall be dismissed. 
Sec. 62-101. - Annual leave. 
(a)	The city provides paid annual leave for all employees who have completed 12 full months of service. Annual leave is paid at the employee's normal rate of pay. Annual leave can not be carried over from year to year. Any accrued time not taken before December 31 will be lost. Annual leave will only be allowed in increments of one-quarter days. 
(b)	Annual leave is accrued based on the following schedule: 

 
(c)	A new employee may not request annual leave until they have worked continually for an initial period of 12 months with the city. This waiting period is necessary for orientation, training and evaluation purposes. 
(d)	Annual leave may be used for any purpose. Requests for foreseeable leave shall be submitted for approval to the city manager at least two weeks in advance of the employee's scheduled leave. Whenever possible, leave must be approved in advance to ensure that the timing is mutually convenient for the employee, other employees, and the city. Consequently, it is advisable to make requests well in advance for popular periods (e.g., school vacations). 
(e)	In the event that two or more staff request leave for the same time or period, and all requests cannot be accommodated, the city manager and supervisor will make a determination, taking into account individual circumstances and the time of application. 
(f)	In the event of unforeseeable leave, as with any absence, an employee must call in if he is unable to report to work. 
(g)	Upon resignation or termination, any accrued but unused annual leave will be included in the employee's final pay calculation. An employee who resigns without giving two weeks' notice will not receive payment for accrued but unused annual leave. Employees who are terminated will be paid for no more than 30 days of accrued, unused annual leave. 
Sec. 62-102. - Sick leave. 
Sick leave will be accumulated at the rate of one-fourth day per month for all city employees. Sick leave not taken will accumulate toward the employee's retirement credit. Any employee out of work for three consecutive days due to illness must have a certification from a doctor pertaining to the cause of illness. If the statement is not obtained, the employee will not be paid for this time off. 
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste refers to all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means material in a solid or semi-solid resulting from the manufacturing or use of pesticides on drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, that the city may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in rules of the state department of natural resources with regard to radioactive materials. 
Industrial waste or industrial solid waste means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises, and includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste, and similar waste. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate that may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount or municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Person means any person, partnership, public or private corporation, association, institution, individual or other entity. 
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
Rubbish means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places or residence, commercial areas and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, bedding, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes, and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state, not otherwise defined in this article. 
Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1996, § 1A; Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Secs. 66-2—66-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE COLLECTION 

Sec. 66-21. - Collection by city. 
All solid waste generated or accumulated in the areas served by the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees, or contract representative. No other person shall collect, transport or dispose of any solid waste generated or accumulated in the city unless specifically authorized by the city; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the producers of industrial solid waste or the owner of premises upon which industrial solid waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such waste in accordance with rules and regulations established by the state department of natural resources but only if such service is not provided by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-22. - Prohibited disposal and accumulation. 
No person shall place any solid waste in any stream, lake or other body of water. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the mayor and council shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and a public nuisance subject to the abatement provisions of chapter 38. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-23. - Garbage containers. 
(a)	Use required . No person shall dispose of any solid waste for collection or other purposes, except in the proper containers as provided by this article. 
(b)	Provided by city; fees . Solid waste containers shall be provided by the city for the fee established by the city council and shall be maintained in good condition by the city or its designees or contract representatives. 
(c)	Container specifications and maintenance . Each container shall be durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight, rodent proof, and easily cleaned. Containers shall be equipped with suitable handles and tightfitting covers and shall have a capacity of not more than 32 gallons. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or with sharp or jagged edges or with defects liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced. 
(d)	Plastic bags . Plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste storage and disposal may be used to contain garbage and rubbish for storage and collection. Disposable bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-24. - Preparation and storage of garbage prior to collection. 
(a)	Draining maximum weight and length . Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquid before being placed for collection. Rubbish may be placed in containers not over 50 pounds gross weight when placed for collection or in bundles not over 50 pounds each. Limbs or cuttings shall be not over four feet in length and four inches in diameter. Larger items in size or weight may be handled at special fees to be determined by the city. All containers shall be free of sand and rocks. 
(b)	Placement for pickup . Solid waste to be collected by the city or its representative shall be placed on the curb or roadway in front of the residence or establishment in which it accumulated, but not on the sidewalk or in the gutter. City garbage personnel will not collect garbage inside any establishment or place of business. Business or establishment containers shall be in one central location for easy access by workers. If property is fenced in, cans will be placed outside of the fence for collection and placed back over the fence when emptied. Containers are to be placed on the city street property for garbage collection only and must be promptly removed after each collection. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-25. - Scavenging of containers. 
No person other than owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where the same shall have been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-26. - Classification of solid waste; prohibited classes. 
(a)	Acceptable solid waste . Only the following classes of solid waste shall be acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)	Garbage and rubbish, as defined in this chapter. 
(2)	Ashes, the residue from burning of combustible materials for fuel. 
(3)	Small dead animals, not over 30 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without change; provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(b)	Unacceptable solid waste . The following classes of solid shall not be acceptable for collection by the city: 
(1)	Materials resulting from the construction or demolition of a building, such as plaster, mortar, broken masonry, scrap lumber, roofing or similar materials. 
(2)	Hazardous waste as defined by state law. 
(3)	Dead animals weighing more than 30 pounds. 
(4)	Industrial solid waste as defined herein. 
(5)	Old vehicle tires. 
(6)	Fence wire. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Secs. 66-27—66-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD TRIMMINGS 

Sec. 66-56. - Placement for disposal. 
It shall be unlawful to place or mix leaves or yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1996, § 1B; Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Sec. 66-57. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting. 
Leaves and grass clippings must be placed in a biodegradable container and placed by curbside for pickup. Brush, shrub, tree prunings, and discarded Christmas trees will be placed by curbside for pickup. 
(Ord. of 12-9-1996, § 1C; Ord. of 11-10-2014(2)) 
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to improve and maintain streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means a street, alley, sidewalk or other public property owned by the city or under its supervision. 
Sec. 70-2. - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall place any garbage, rubbish, trash, paper or any litter of any kind whatsoever upon any street, sidewalk, alley, park, lane or other public grounds of the city. 
Sec. 70-3. - Limited use of sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful to ride bicycles, skates or skateboards on city sidewalks in front of business establishments during normal business hours. 
Secs. 70-4—70-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 70-25. - Obstructing ditches, drains. 
It shall be unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to fill up any ditch or drain in any of the streets or alleys of the city or to purposely place any obstruction therein to prevent the free flow of water. 
Sec. 70-26. - Obstructing streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to convert any public street, sidewalk or alley in the city to his use, or place, or cause to be placed, any obstruction in or upon them, such as wood, barrels and boxes, merchandise, timber or lumber, except necessarily for building purposes and such obstruction shall be moved by the police or street department at the expense of the owner thereof or the person causing said obstruction; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the placing or goods, wares, merchandise, produce, boxes, barrels, or other articles on the sidewalks within three feet from the wall of a building owned by the person placing such article. 
Sec. 70-27. - Placing trash receptacles on right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to place or cause to be placed any dumpster or other type of trash receptacle in the right-of-way area of any city street except the placing of garbage on the sidewalk at the curb on garbage day. 
Sec. 70-28. - Obstructing view of intersection. 
It shall be unlawful, and a public nuisance, for the opener or person in charge of any lot, parcel or piece of land within the city to allow any obstructions to vision in the triangle formed by the lines of two intersecting streets, or a street and an alley and line joining points of such lines 25 feet distant from their point of intersection by permitting any vegetation to grow or be maintained between the heights of three feet and ten feet above the grade of the centerline of the intersection, or by constructing or maintaining any fence or other structure which constitutes an obstruction to view within the triangle. 
Secs. 70-29—70-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 70-60. - Permit required. 
No person shall dig or excavate in any public place within the city or do any other work in or on any public place, which requires the removal or breaking of the surface or under part of any such public place, unless and until such person shall have first secured, in the manner provided in this article, permission to do so. 
Sec. 70-61. - Application. 
Each person desiring permission to dig or excavate in any public place shall file with the city clerk a written or printed application, setting forth the character and location of such work to be done in any such public place, the probable number of square yards of surface to be removed and the probable date of beginning and completion of the work. 
Sec. 70-62. - Fees and deposits. 
In the event the applicant for the permit to excavate is qualified to perform the work himself, including replacing the street to its condition prior to the excavation, there shall be no charge for the issuance of the permit. If the city must fill and resurface the street or public way, the applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of application, a sum of money that shall be fixed by the city superintendent and shall be based on the cost per square yard of replacement plus ten percent. 
Sec. 70-63. - Grant or refusal of permit. 
Each application for an excavation permit shall be delivered by the city clerk to the city superintendent, who shall without unreasonable delay, either grant or reject such application. Upon rejection of the application, the applicant shall have the right to present the matter to the mayor and council, the order of which shall be final in such matter, and upon final rejection, the deposit shall be returned to the person who deposited the same. 
Sec. 70-64. - Failure to complete or restore. 
Upon the failure of any person, whose application to dig or excavate shall have been granted and who shall have begun the work, to complete the same without delay, or upon the completion of such work, to restore the public place to the same or as good a condition as the same was before such work was done, or to comply with any reasonable rules or regulations of the city superintendent from time to time given to such person for the completion and restoration of such public place, such person shall upon conviction, in addition to other penalties, forfeit to the city any deposit of money so made with the city clerk. 
Sec. 70-65. - Restoration by city. 
Upon the failure of any person to make such repairs, in the manner herein required, and in the time herein required, the city superintendent is empowered and authorized to cause such repairs to be made and such public place to be restored to its original condition, and the cost thereof, plus ten percent thereof, shall be charged to and paid by such person who so failed to make such repairs, and such sum of money shall constitute and be a debt due from such person to the city. 
Sec. 70-66. - Use or refund of deposit. 
The deposit required by this article shall stand as a guarantee and may be employed by the city for the replacement of such public place in as good condition as the same was immediately before the excavation or digging and upon default of the person so making such deposit to restore immediately the public place to as good condition as the same was immediately before such excavation or digging was done by him, the city superintendent may employ the whole or any part of such deposit of money necessary for such restoration. Upon the restoration of the public place to such condition as the same was immediately before such digging or excavating, the city clerk shall, upon the certificate of the city superintendent, restore to the person so making such deposit such sum of money so deposited, or in case any part thereof is employed by the city for such restoration of such public place, upon such certificate, the city clerk shall refund such part of such sum of money remaining. 
Sec. 70-67. - Prompt work. 
All digging or excavating to be done, as provided in this article, shall be promptly started and completed without delay after permission shall have been granted, and such public place shall be, immediately upon the completion of such work, restored to the same or as good condition as the same was before such work was done thereon. Such work or restoration shall be at all times and in all respects in compliance with the orders and supervision of the city superintendent from time to time given to such person for such purpose. 
Sec. 70-68. - Warning devices; posting permit. 
Upon the granting of an application for permission to dig or excavate in any public place, and in all other cases provided for in this article, it shall be the duty of the applicant, before beginning any such work, to enclose the place where such work is being done or otherwise afford adequate protection to street traffic. He shall post and keep posted at such place a placard showing that the work is being done under a permit granted by the city, with sufficient other information thereon to give ample warning to those using the public place that the same is out of repair or being repaired, and in addition thereto, he shall place sufficient markings at night with required lights, to notify those having the right to use the same that such public place, or part thereof, is closed. 
Sec. 70-69. - Decision of council final. 
Any controversy between the person making a deposit in order to dig or excavate in any public place and the city clerk or city superintendent respecting any of the duties to be performed by any of them, may be submitted to the mayor and council by any of the parties, and when so submitted, the action of the mayor and council thereon shall be binding on all the parties. 
Secs. 70-70—70-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED BRAKES 

Sec. 70-97. - Council approval required. 
Installation of speed brakes or ripples on any street within the corporate limits of the city shall require advance approval by the city council. Approval shall be sought using the procedure provided in this article. 
Sec. 70-98. - Petition. 
Persons desiring to have speed brakes or ripples installed on a city street shall file a written petition with the city clerk. The petition must include, at a minimum, the name of the street where such speed brakes or ripples are requested and the typewritten names and residence addresses and signatures of no less than 90 percent of property owners who own property bounding said street requesting that such speed brakes or ripples be installed. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2003; Ord. of 2-9-2004) 
Sec. 70-99. - Review by council; reconsideration. 
The clerk, after verifying that the petition contains the minimum requirements set forth in this article, shall submit the petition to the city council for consideration at the next regularly scheduled meeting occurring after the filing date of the petition. The city council shall either approve or deny the petition as it deems appropriate in its sole discretion. If the petition is denied, is shall not be again filed with the city until at least 12 calendar months has passed since the date of denial. 
(Ord. of 10-13-2003; Ord. of 2-9-2004) 
Secs. 70-100—70-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY STREETS 

Sec. 70-127. - Standards for acceptance. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a city street may be accepted and dedicated as a city street by the city council, provided that all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)	The city owns property that was formerly an airport runway, but which has been closed as an airport runway; 
(2)	The property is within the city limits; 
(3)	The property would be suitable for use as a public street, regardless of whether such property is paved, curbed, and guttered; and 
(4)	The persons or entities other than the city own property abutting such proposed street. 
Sec. 70-128. - Paving, guttering, and utility services. 
(a)	A proposed street may be accepted and dedicated as a public street notwithstanding the fact that it does not have existing curbing and guttering, and that it does not meet the standards for acceptance by the city as a public street as more particularly established in other provisions of the city Code. Upon acceptance of a street, the city shall be under no obligation to pave, curb, or gutter the street or to provide utility services to property or property owners abutting such city street. No unpaved street shall be accepted by the city for ownership and maintenance. 
(b)	No service roads, rights-of-way or driveways shall be accepted by the city for ownership and maintenance until such have been hard surfaced with asphalt or concrete and maintained in good condition for a period of two years. 
Secs. 70-129—70-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET NAMING 

Sec. 70-155. - City council to have power, authority. 
The city council shall have the sole power and authority to name and rename new and existing streets owned by and located within the city and shall bear the costs thereof except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2006, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 70-156. - Petition for street renaming. 
Citizens may request the renaming of existing city streets upon the written petition of not less than 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the street sought to be renamed, filed with the city clerk. The petition shall indicate thereon the existing name of the street, the proposed new name of the street, the printed name, street address, and signature of each property owner signing such petition, and the date that each property owner signed such petition. The petition shall also include a brief written statement, in succinct detail, of the reasons for the proposed street renaming in honor of the particular person or business listed. Each of the factors to be considered by the board, as set forth in this article, shall be addressed by the petitioner in the written statement. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 70-157. - Validation by clerk. 
The clerk shall have 30 calendar days from the date of filing of the petition to validate the petition. Validation occurs when the clerk verifies that the proper number of signatures are contained on the petition, that signatures to be counted toward the 75 percent threshold meet the requirements of this article, and that the persons signing the petition are owners of real property abutting the street sought to be renamed, except as otherwise provided herein. If the clerk finds that the petition is not valid, it shall be returned to the applicant. No petition shall be considered by the council until validated by the clerk. 
Sec. 70-158. - Calculation of percentage of property owners. 
In determining the proper percentage of persons signing a petition for street renaming: 
(1)	If property is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted. 
(2)	Persons who rent or lease real property abutting the street sought to be renamed may sign the petition, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. 
(3)	Signatures dated more than 90 calendar days prior to the date of filing of the petition shall be invalid and shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. 
Sec. 70-159. - Consideration of petition for renaming. 
Validated petitions for street renaming shall be submitted by the city clerk to the council. The council shall either grant or deny the petition within 90 calendar days of the date it is submitted to the council by the clerk. If the council does not act on the petition prior to the expiration of 90 calendar days from the date the petition is submitted to the council by the clerk, the street shall automatically be renamed as requested in the petition, subject only to the payment by the petitioners of the fees and costs required as provided in this article. 
Sec. 70-160. - Denial of petition. 
If the proposed renaming is not approved by the city council, then no petition seeking to rename said street shall be accepted by the city clerk for a period of six calendar months from the date of the denial of the street renaming petition. 
Sec. 70-161. - Approval of petition. 
If the petition for street renaming is approved by the city council, the name change shall take effect at such time as is established by the council, but not sooner than upon payment of the costs of renaming as provided in this article. 
Sec. 70-162. - Waiting list for street renaming. 
The council shall consider request to name or rename a particular street or to use a particular name in reference to any street. If, in the sole discretion of the council, the name proposed is acceptable, but there is no street appropriate for renaming, the approved name shall be placed on a waiting list to be maintained by the city clerk. The approved name will be assigned from the waiting list by the council as it deems appropriate. 
Sec. 70-163. - Costs of renaming; failure to pay. 
Upon approval of a petition for street naming, the petitioners shall pay to the city clerk the renaming fee established by the city council to cover the cost and expense of the renaming. Such payment shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. If the street renaming costs are not paid to the city clerk within 30 calendar days of the date of approval of the petition, the street renaming shall not be effective for any purposes whatsoever and shall be deemed repealed as of the 31st day after initial approval of the petition. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 70-164. - Naming a street after a natural person. 
In making a determination regarding naming or renaming a street to a name derived from the name of a living or deceased natural person, the city council shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)	Whether the person has resided for a long period of time on such street; 
(2)	Whether the person has made significant and long-lasting contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(3)	Whether the person is a national or internationally prominent figure who has or may have a direct or indirect connection to the city and its citizens; 
(4)	Whether the person has provided charitable or philanthropic contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(5)	Whether the person has brought honor, prestige, or recognition in a positive manner to the city and its citizens; 
(6)	Whether the person is a leader in local governmental, civic, educational, or public affairs; 
(7)	Whether the person is a distinguished and accomplished scholar, scientist, educational leader, business leader, government leader, or civic leader; or 
(8)	Such other factors as the city council deems applicable. 
Sec. 70-165. - Naming a street after a business entity. 
No street shall be named after any ongoing business that is not located upon the street to be named in honor of such business. In considering naming or renaming a street to a name derived from or consisting of a business name, the city council shall consider the following: 
(1)	Whether the business is located upon such street; 
(2)	The length of time that such business has been located on such street; 
(3)	The length of time that such business has been located within the city; 
(4)	The civic, community, and educational contributions of the business to the city and its citizens; 
(5)	The length of time that such business is expected to remain in business under the same name on such street; or 
(6)	Such other factors as the city council deems relevant. 
Sec. 70-166. - Changing street signs without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any sign designating a street, avenue or other public place by a different name than that by which it is generally and legally known, or to refuse to remove the same from his property when requested to do so by an officer of the city. 
Sec. 70-167. - Injuring or removing street signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to injure, deface or remove any of the street signs posted at or near the corner of the streets in the city. 
Secs. 70-168—70-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREET NUMBERING 

Sec. 70-188. - Designation. 
All official addresses shall be designated by the 911 coordinator. 
Sec. 70-189. - Duty to number; removal of prior number. 
The owner, occupant or person in charge of any structure to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous place as set forth in this article. It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge of the structure upon affixing the new number to remove any different number that might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure by the 911 coordinator. 
Sec. 70-190. - Placement of numbers. 
All structures shall have the correct address posted on the structure, or at the entrance to the property as provided for in this article, where it will be clearly visible to persons or vehicles approaching the structure. When a structure is more than 35 feet from the road, or when the view of the structure is blocked by trees, shrubs or other material, the numbers shall be on a tree, mailbox, fence, gate or lawn stake at the entrance to the property on the same side of the road as the entrance to the property and clearly visible and legible from the road. On corner lots, numbers shall be displayed on the frontage to which the structure is facing. If more than one structure has a single access, the principal address shall be displayed at the access and subaddresses displayed on the structure to which they apply. This is applicable to apartments, condominiums and manufactured home parks as well as other multi-structure facilities. 
Sec. 70-191. - Size and color of numbering. 
All addresses shall be legible and shall be large enough to be seen easily from the street. The 911 coordinator recommends that each number be a minimum of three inches square. Numbers shall be of contrasting color to their background for easy visibility. Numbers shall be easily visible at night. 
Sec. 70-192. - Enforcement. 
If the owner, agent or occupant of an officially addressed structure shall neglect or refuse to affix or inscribe the proper numbers as required by this article, the city building official or his designee shall serve notice on the owner, agent or occupant. The numbers shall be properly affixed to the property in accordance with this article within ten days of the service of notice. After expiration of this ten-day period, such owner, agent or occupant may be fined as set forth in this section and the numbers caused to be affixed by the city building official or his designee. Any person who fails to affix or takes down, alters, injures or defaces any number affixed or inscribed to a structure pursuant to this article, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
Secs. 70-193—70-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TENTS 

Sec. 70-223. - Use restricted. 
No tent measuring greater than ten feet by ten feet shall be erected in the city without prior permission of the city council. All requests for the raising of a tent larger than ten feet by ten feet shall be submitted 30 days prior to the date the tent is needed. The duration of the tent event shall not be greater than 21 days. This article shall not apply to tents erected for funeral or civic function purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2001(1), §§ 1, 2, 6, 7) 
Sec. 70-224. - Electrical inspection; fee. 
If electricity will be used in the tent structure, an electrical inspection must be performed. The person seeking approval for the use of the tent shall pay a fee for each inspection in the amount established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2001(1), § 3) 
Sec. 70-225. - Toilet facilities. 
The person authorized to use a tent must make arrangements for the disposal of human waste in accordance with the health codes of the state. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2001(1), § 4) 
Sec. 70-226. - Presentation of business license. 
If the tent is being used for commercial purposes, a copy of a valid business license must be presented at the time of request to raise a tent. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2001(1), § 5) 
Secs. 70-227—70-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 

Sec. 70-246. - Public addresses, demonstrations; consent required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any public address or demonstration in the corporate limits of said city unless written consent therefor has been granted by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 70-247. - Permits for parades and processions. 
No funeral, procession, or parade containing 50 or more persons or five or more vehicles, excepting the United States military forces, shall march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with permission issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
Secs. 70-248, 70-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERMITS FOR SPECIAL ACTIVITIES TO BE HELD ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 70-250. - Permits for special activities. 
(a)	This article is intended to apply to special activities proposed to be held on public property within the city. Any organization wishing to sponsor or hold a special activity upon or within public property in the city will be required to complete the city's special activity permit application and obtain approval of such special activity as provided in this article. 
(b)	As required by this article a special activity within the city that will be conducted on the streets, in the parks, in other public areas, or on or within public property owned or operated by the city, must be approved by the city manager. Applications to conduct a special activity must be made in writing to the office of the city manager. Applications shall be available from the city clerk's office. Applications shall be submitted to the city manager office no later than 30 days prior to the date of the actual event. No special activity shall be permitted within the city unless such special activity is approved by the city manager. 
(c)	The city may hold its own special activities, or it may contract with one or more organizations to perform special activity services, or it may jointly sponsor a special activity with one or more organizations. In such cases, the participating organization shall submit a special activity permit application that shall include a presentation of the city's financial participation, if any, and the financial participation of the related organizations. In the event that the city decides to hold its own special activities, no special activity permit shall be required. 
(d)	The city manager shall undertake a complete review of any special activity application, including consultation with the applicant as may be reasonably necessary to resolve problems, at no charge to event sponsors. Upon completion of such review, the city manager shall determine whether the special activity permit should be approved or denied based upon the provisions of this article. In the event that the city manager is unable to determine whether or not a special activity permit should be issued to an applicant, or in the event that the city manager has substantial concerns or reservations as to whether the special activity permit should be issued or denied, then the city manager may submit the application to the mayor and city council for a determination as to whether the special activity permit should be issued, and the decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Otherwise, the decision of the city manager as to the grant or denial of a special activity permit is final and not subject to appeal. 
(e)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter, affect or repeal the provisions of this Code that require parade permits to be issued by the chief of police under the appropriate ordinances applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-251. - Basis for city services. 
(a)	The city will provide support to special activities on the following basis: 
(1)	City-operated activities . The city will operate certain special activities directly. The full cost of these special activities, if any, will be funded by the city. 
(2)	Co-sponsored activities . The city will co-sponsor certain activities with other organizations when the city manager determines that the activity is of general interest to the public and advances the city's purposes. The city will provide financial support to these activities as determined in the city's annual budget appropriation. These activities must meet the requirements of the special activities policy and any city costs in excess of the support level authorized by the budget appropriation, must be reimbursed to the city by the city's co-sponsor. 
(3)	Other nonprofit activities . Unless otherwise provided by the mayor and city council, the city may provide one person, if necessary, to act as a liaison between the city and the sponsors of a special activity operated by nonprofit organizations. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activities permit policy and the sponsor must reimburse the city for any city costs in excess of this support level. 
(4)	Other for-profit activities . The city will allow other special activities operated by for-profit sponsors that are beneficial to the city and the public, subject to a rent charge for the use of the public property that is approved for each activity. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activity permit policy and the sponsor must reimburse the city for any city costs in addition to the payment of established rent charges. 
(b)	The final decision as to what services the city shall provide under this section shall be made by the city manager, subject both to the terms of this article and the funds available for such services in the city's annual budget. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-252. - Fees. 
Fees shall be charged for city services provided to special activities as follows: 
(1)	Straight time shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during the normal work day including the actual cost for fringe benefits. 
(2)	Overtime shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during a time period that would be considered overtime for city payroll records, including the actual cost for fringe benefits. 
(3)	Purchased or rented materials shall include all direct costs for all materials purchased or rented by the city for use at the activity. 
(4)	Equipment charges shall be the current equipment rental rates charged by the city. In addition thereto, for any authorized special activity where city electricity is required by the applicant, there shall be a charge of $25.00 per day for each day electricity is used by the sponsor at the site of the special activity. If separate booths are part of the special activity, whether such booths are sponsored by the applicant or by a third party, then the charge for electricity shall be $25.00 per day for each booth, which charge for booth electricity shall be in addition to the daily electricity charge for the special activity where the activity sponsor uses any city electricity at the site of the special activity. Such charge shall not be subject to waiver, and in the event that it is determined that the applicant/sponsor, or the sponsor of any booth, utilized city electrical services without advising the city of its intent to do so in the application for a special activity permit, then the applicant/sponsor, or booth sponsor, as the case may be, shall pay the sum of $100.00 per day for the use of such electricity. 
(5)	An application fee in the amount established by resolution adopted in accord with section 70-253 shall be paid at the time of application. The application fee is intended to cover the city's expenses related to approval of the permit application and related expenses. If a waiver of such fee is requested by a nonprofit corporation under this section, such waiver must be approved by the city manager at the time the application is approved, and if such waiver is granted, then the city, in its discretion, may either refund the application fee to the applicant or credit the application fee against other amounts owed by the applicant to the city under this article. Denial of the application shall not be grounds for waiver or refund of the application fee. An applicant shall only be entitled to a waiver of the application fee where the applicant provides written proof to the city manager that the applicant is a then-current nonprofit corporation exempt from the payment of income taxes in accord with 26 U.S.C. § 501(c). 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-253. - Billing for special activities. 
The mayor and city council shall be authorized to establish the hourly charges payable to the city to reimburse the city for the city's costs and expenses incurred in connection with an approved special activity. Such hourly charges shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council from time to time as determined by said governing body. Billing for such amounts shall be submitted by the city to the sponsor of the special activity, and such billed amounts shall be paid by such sponsor with 15 days of the date of the bill. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-254. - Rental charges for private for-profit activities. 
Special activities that are exclusively sponsored by private for-profit organizations shall be charged a reasonable rent for use of public areas, such as parks or streets, in addition to the special activity fees provided herein. The rent shall be set by the mayor and city council by resolution adopted in accord with section 70-253 hereof. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-255. - Civic organizations and merchants' participation encouraged. 
It is the desire of the mayor and city council that local nonprofit organizations and local merchants in the vicinity of the special activity being held are given the opportunity to participate in the special activity to the greatest extent practical, consistent with the nature and purpose of the special activity. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-256. - Liability insurance requirements. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall require that all sponsors of special activities purchase and maintain during the special activity liability insurance with coverage limits of at least $1,000,000.00, except for low-hazard activities as defined in subsection (c) of this section. Where liability insurance is required, an activity sponsor shall be required to provide a valid certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional or named insured prior to the activity. The city manager may require higher levels of insurance based upon risk factors and past experience. 
(b)	The city manager shall conduct a risk assessment in reviewing each special activity permit application. Based upon such review, the city manager shall determine whether the level of risk to the city resulting from the special activity should require the sponsor to purchase no liability insurance, the amounts of liability insurance provided in subsection (a) of this section, or additional liability insurance in excess of the amounts provided in subsection (a) of this section. Any amount of liability insurance to be purchased by the applicant in excess of the amounts established in subsection (a) of this section shall be as determined by the city manager. 
(c)	It shall be the policy of the mayor and city council to not routinely require insurance coverage for activities classified by the mayor and city council as low-hazard activities. These would be activities that include no physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. This waiver of the insurance requirements is meant to cover small gatherings or ceremonies that do not involve more than 50 people, are limited to passive participation by the public, and require no city services. The sponsors of all other special activities are required to provide insurance as established in the manner set out in this article. 
(d)	When approving a special activity permit, the city manager may impose additional requirements as a condition of permit issuance. Such additional requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, specific staffing levels for police, fire, public works, or other personnel in connection with the activity. Expenses incurred by the city in compliance with such requirements shall be billed to and paid by the sponsoring organization as provided in this article. Agreement by the sponsoring organization to pay such additional expenses may be established as a condition of the issuance of the permit by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-257. - Traffic control and safety requirements. 
The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for complying with all traffic control and safety procedures required by the city during the activity. The requirements will be indicated in the notice of approval, and additional requirements may be made by the city from time to time during the activity as may be necessary for the safety of the public. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-258. - Participant waiver of liability. 
The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for obtaining all signed indemnification and waiver of liability agreements as required by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-259. - Multiple applications for the same activity date. 
In the event that two or more special activity permit applications are received for the same date and time prior to the approval of either activity, the date and time that each application was received by the city shall determine the order of preference. Once a special activity permit has been granted, it shall be the policy of the mayor and city council to not award further permits for the same date, time, and general location. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-260. - Reservation of annual activity dates. 
If an activity is intended to be an annual activity at regularly scheduled dates, the current year's application may include the following year's requested dates. Approval of the current year's application will include reservation of the next year's proposed dates. However, it will not constitute approval of next year's special activity permit, which must have its own timely application submitted for city approval. In general, no special activity permits shall be approved more than one year in advance. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Sec. 70-261. - Confirmation of city approval. 
Upon approval or denial of the special activity permit application, a written confirmation of the decision of the city manager will be forwarded by the city manager to the individual or organization requesting the special activity permit. If there are any special conditions that must be met as a condition of the issuance of an approved special activity permit, such conditions shall be included in the written notice of approval of the special activity permit application. If the terms of such special activity permit, or any special conditions applicable to the special activity permit, are not complied with by the sponsor, then the city manager shall be authorized to revoke such special activity permit and written notice of such revocation shall be provided by the city manager to the sponsor by regular mail, by statutory overnight delivery, or by personal delivery, whichever is deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2016) 
Chapter 74 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Land subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development; and includes immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development; and includes all divisions of land involving a new streets, a change in existing streets or the extension of water, sewer or gas lines and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of these regulations. 
(2)	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
Manufactured home means a detached, single-family dwelling unit designed for longterm occupancy; designed to be transported on its own wheels, arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete, usually including major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy. 
Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufacture home park means a parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for nontransit use. 
Manufactured home stand means that part of an individual manufactured home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a manufactured home and appurtenance structures. 
Planning commission means the official planning body for the city. 
Street includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys and other ways. 
Sec. 74-2. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-10. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The city of any owner of real estate who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation. 
Secs. 74-3—74-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-44. - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the planning commission shall be the platting authority. 
Sec. 74-45. - Preliminary plat approval required prior to initiation of construction. 
No construction work shall be undertaken on a proposed land subdivision until a preliminary plat has been approved by the planning commission. 
Sec. 74-46. - Land subdivision plat recording. 
No plat of a land subdivision shall be accepted for recording in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county except a final plat on which is inscribed the approval of the planning commission. 
Sec. 74-47. - Use of plat. 
The transfer of, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
Sec. 74-48. - Erection of buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with this article, or unless such street had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or has been accepted as a public street by the city council. 
Sec. 74-49. - Acceptance of and improvements in unapproved streets. 
The city council or other public authority shall not accept as a public street or shall not itself undertake or authorize the layout, opening, improving, grading, paving, lighting or the installation of water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street unless such street is shown on a final plat approved by the planning commission or it had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, that the city council may locate, construct or accept any other street if the ordinance for such a street is first submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval. 
Secs. 74-50—74-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREAPPLICATION 

Sec. 74-72. - Procedures. 
Before proceeding with a proposed land subdivision, developers are invited and encouraged to discuss their proposed development with the secretary of the planning commission. A very preliminary sketch of the proposed subdivision, together with a map of the area showing its principal features, will be helpful in this discussion. 
Secs. 74-73—74-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 74-103. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the secretary of the planning commission, at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat, giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Five copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(3)	A preliminary plat filing fee in the amount established from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 74-104. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)	The secretary of the planning commission shall check the plat for conformance to the regulations of this article and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)	Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made on two copies of the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval of the preliminary plat is disapproved. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one copy added to the records of the planning commission. 
(c)	Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission. 
(d)	If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within 30 days of the date of submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand; however, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Secs. 74-105—74-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 74-122. - Preparation guidelines. 
Preliminary plats for subdivisions shall be prepared as follows: 
(1)	Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch. 
(2)	Sheet size. Sheet size shall be 42 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(3)	Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
a.	The name and address of the owner of record and of the subdivider. 
b.	The proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
c.	North arrow, graphic scale and date. 
d.	The vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision and developments in its vicinity. 
e.	Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances. 
f.	The names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
g.	Existing streets, utilities and easements on the land adjacent to the tract. 
h.	Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet. 
i.	Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
j.	Block numbers and lot numbers. 
k.	Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
l.	Minimum building front yard setback lines. 
m.	Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the planning commission. 
Sec. 74-123. - Certificate of approval. 
A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"Pursuant to the city Land Subdivision Regulations, all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was approved by the planning commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
This approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of approval of the preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ (Date)." 

 
Sec. 74-124. - Waiver of the preliminary plat procedure. 
The approval of the preliminary plat can be waived if so recommended by the secretary and approved by the planning commission. It deems necessary prior to such a recommendation for the secretary to determine if the subdivider has successfully, with good standing, completed a minimum of three subdivisions, of which at least two are in the city. The final approval authority of the waiver of the preliminary plat rests on the planning commission. 
Sec. 74-125. - Initiation of improvements. 
After a preliminary plat has been approved, no improvements in the land subdivision shall be undertaken until final engineering plans and specifications have been approved by the city. 
Secs. 74-126—74-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 74-149. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been approved by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one year from approval, submit to the planning commission: 
(1)	A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat, giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)	Five copies of the final plat and other documents, as specified in article VII of this chapter, the original of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on cloth or film. 
(3)	A final plat filing fee and a recording fee in the amount established from time to time by the city council. 
Sec. 74-150. - Review of final plat. 
The secretary of the planning commission shall check the final plat for the following requirements: 
(1)	Conformance with the approved preliminary plat and with the regulations of this article, and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)	If the preliminary plat is waived by the planning commission according to the procedures and requirements outlined in section 74-124, the planning commission shall examine and approve the final plat using the plat specifications outlined in article VII of this chapter. 
(3)	The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the original tracing and two prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. If action of a final plat is not taken by the planning commission within 30 days of the date of the submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand; however, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Sec. 74-151. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat, the secretary of the planning commission shall have the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of submitting the final plat as provided in section 74-149. Subsequent to the recording of the final plat, one copy on cloth or film and one additional copy with all certificates endorsed thereon shall be filed with the records of the planning commission. The Map Book, volume and page numbers where the plat is recorded shall also be indicated on the copies. 
Secs. 74-152—74-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 74-171. - Final plat requirements. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and the following additional specifications: 
(1)	The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on tracing cloth or tracing film at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet sizes shall be 42 inches by 36 inches, and where more than one sheet is required, an index map shall be provided on the same size sheet. The final plat shall show: 
a.	Bearings and distances of the subdivision boundaries to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than three) accurately described on the plat. 
b.	Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the boundary lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
c.	Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minutes, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 5,000. 
d.	The name of the subdivision, exact locations, width, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
e.	Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
f.	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot. 
g.	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
h.	Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
i.	Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
j.	A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
k.	The following certifications: 
1.	An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist or are marked as 'future', and their location, size, type and materials are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the City Land Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with." 
By: ____________ Registered P.E. No. ____________ 

 
By: ____________ Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. ____________ 
2.	An owner's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state and city taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid." 

 
3.	A certificate by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements he dedicates to the public and the extent of the title which he is dedicating should be attached to the final plat. Because of the legal consideration here, this certificate shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
4.	A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, directly on the plat, as follows: 
"Pursuant to the City Land Subdivision Regulations, all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was approved by the planning commission on ____________ , 20 ____________ ." 

 
(2)	In addition to the final plat, the subdivider shall present to the city one complete set of construction plans and drawings, including the following: 
a.	The actual location of all utility lines. 
b.	Profiles and invert elevations of all stormwater and sanitary sewer lines, as built. 
c.	Centerline profiles of all streets, as built. 
Secs. 74-172—74-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATION, AND DESIGN 

Sec. 74-196. - General improvements. 
(a)	Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
(1)	All applicable statutory provisions. 
(2)	Chapter 94 (building and housing codes) and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions. 
(3)	The official master plan, official map, public utilities plan and capital improvements program of the local government, including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or master plan as adopted. 
(4)	The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the health department and/or appropriate state agencies. 
(5)	The rules of the state highway department if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
(6)	The standards and regulations adopted by the city's consulting engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the city. 
(7)	All pertinent standards contained within the planning guides published by the city planning commission. 
(8)	Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the guidelines or policy and purposes of these regulations. 
(b)	Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by chapter 94 or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the planning commission may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the county recorder of deeds in a form to be approved by the city attorney. 
(c)	Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another local government, the planning commission may request assurance from the city attorney that access is legally established, and from the city's consulting engineer that the access road is adequately improved, or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to ensure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
(d)	Monuments. The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
(1)	Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being contained wholly within the street limits. 
(2)	The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in length, not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. The monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line, and at all angle points along the meander line, said points to be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the street. 
(3)	All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in subsection (d)(2) of this section shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as described in subsection (d)(2) of this section. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a river changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line. 
(4)	The lines of lots that extend to streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and seven-eights inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the stream lot line. 
(5)	All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the planning commission recommends approval of the final plat. 
(e)	Character of the land. Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the planning commission to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
(f)	Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The planning commission shall have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be determined at preliminary plat approval. 
Sec. 74-197. - Lot improvements. 
(a)	Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with chapter 94 and health regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street. 
(b)	Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of chapter 94. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with chapter 94 and these regulations. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in chapter 94. 
(c)	Double frontage lots and access lots. 
(1)	Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(2)	Access from major and secondary arterials to lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major or secondary arterials. 
(d)	Soil preservation, grading, and seeding. 
(1)	No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot precovered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches, which shall contain no particles over two inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
(2)	Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
(e)	Debris and water. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of the same shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. Nor shall any be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
(f)	Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish and install fences wherever the planning commission determines that a hazardous condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the city consulting engineer and shall be noted as to height and material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said fence improvements have been duly installed. 
(g)	Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The planning commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No more than 25 percent of the minimum area of a lot required under chapter 94 may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structures, or design approved by the city consulting engineer. 
(h)	Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one. 
(i)	Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(1)	In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structure hereon is prohibited." 
(2)	In districts designated for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(3)	Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
Sec. 74-198. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)	General requirements. The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of subdivision which does not make adequate provision for stormwater or floodwater runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the rational method, or other methods as approved by the planning commission, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with the plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, not for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(b)	Nature of stormwater facilities. 
(1)	Location. The applicant may be required by the planning commission to carry away, by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of, the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
(2)	Accessibility to public storm sewers. 
a.	Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to the specifications of the city's consulting engineer. However, in subdivisions containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the city's consulting engineer. 
b.	If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the city's consulting engineer and the planning commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the performance bond required for the subdivision plat. 
(3)	Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The city's consulting engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by chapter 94. 
(4)	Effect on downstream drainage areas. The city's consulting engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local government drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivisions will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the planning commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the planning commission shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
(5)	Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is subject to flooding, the planning commission may approve such subdivision, provided that the applicant fills the affected area of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation streets and lots at a minimum of 12 inches above the elevation of the maximum probable flood, determined by the city's consulting engineer. The plat of such subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width which shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed therein. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the city's consulting engineer. Areas of extremely poor drainage should be discouraged. 
(6)	Floodplain areas. The planning commission may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste materials, or stumps, except at the discretion of the planning commission. 
(c)	Dedication of drainage easements. 
(1)	General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(2)	Drainage easements. 
a.	Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easement shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.	When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
c.	The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation, easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the planning commission. 
d.	Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainageways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedure nor for computing the area requirements of any lot. 
Secs. 74-199—74-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 74-220. - Continuation of existing street. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
Sec. 74-221. - Street names. 
Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate nor closely approximate those of existing streets. 
Sec. 74-222. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less then 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 74-223. - Culs-de-sac. 
Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, culs-de-sac, or dead-end streets, shall be not greater in length than 600 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 60 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 50 feet. 
Sec. 74-224. - Development along major thoroughfare, limited-access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major thoroughfare, a limited-access highway or a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to a major thoroughfare (or limited-access highway), but only to access streets. 
Sec. 74-225. - Alleys. 
Alleys of a 20-foot width are required at the rear of all lots which are used for multifamily, commercial or industrial purposes. Such alleys provide access to the lot and a location for certain utilities, and facilitate garbage collection. 
Sec. 74-226. - Easements. 
(a)	Easements having a minimum width of ten feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required, for utilities. 
(b)	Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the planning commission in connection therewith. 
Secs. 74-227—74-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-246. - Street right-of way widths. 
Street right-of-way widths shall be measured as the distance across a street from the property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major thoroughfare widths shall be 80 feet to 100 feet, depending on the existence and size of a median strip, determination of which shall be made by the planning commission. 
(2)	Collector streets shall be 80 feet. 
(3)	Local streets and dead-end streets shall be 60 feet. 
(4)	Interior streets shall be 38 feet. 
(5)	Alleys shall be 20 feet. 
Sec. 74-247. - Street grades. 
Maximum and minimum grades of all streets shall be as follows: 
(1)	Vertical alignment of roads. In no case shall roadway grades exceed ten percent nor be less than one-half of one percent. The planning commission may reduce the maximum gradient for nonresidential and land service roads. 
(2)	Horizontal alignment of roads. The radius of road curvature shall be not less than 90 feet, except that the planning commission may increase this minimum radius for nonresidential land service roads. Curve radii shall be measured from the road centerline. A tangent of at least 200 feet shall be provided between reverse curves. 
Sec. 74-248. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. 
Sec. 74-249. - Curbline radius. 
The curb-line radius at street intersection shall be at least 15 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. 
Sec. 74-250. - Street paving widths. 
Street paving widths shall be no less than the following, measured from back of curb: 

 
Sec. 74-251. - Street improvement specifications. 
All major thoroughfares, connector, interior and local streets within a subdivision shall be improved in accordance with the following standards. Tangible improvements shall be made before the city may accept a residential or nonresidential land service road and right-of-way therefore for public ownership and maintenance. Wherever a specification of the state department of transportation is referred to in this article, said reference is made to the appropriate section of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, 1977 Edition. 
(1)	Preparation of right-of-way. The full width of all rights-of-way shall be shaped to approximate required grades, alignment, and other specifications, such that base and wearing surfaces can be constructed, improved, or extended in a manner which will not damage abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable trees and other vegetable matter not impairing visibility. 
a.	Before grading is started, the entire area of the right-of-way shall be cleared of all exposed stumps, logs, grass, weeds, roots, rubbish, loose boulders, and other debris or otherwise objectionable material protruding through the ground surface. 
b.	All tree stumps, boulders, and other obstructions shall be removed to a minimum depth of two feet below the finished surface of all slopes and the area to which base material is to be applied. Rock, whenever encountered, shall be scarified or removed to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
c.	In all areas to be graded or filled, the subdivider shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread over all disturbed areas that are not to be paved. 
d.	All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose and compacted by a sheepsfoot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
(2)	Embankments and erosion control. Immediately after the grading, filling and respreading of topsoil, all shoulders and slopes within the right-of-way shall be stabilized to retard erosions. In addition, all drainage facilities shall be open or temporary slope drains shall be constructed to accommodate and direct acceptable surface level water runoff. 
(3)	Ditches and drains. 
a.	Each road and road right-of-way shall have a drainage system adequate to provide for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
b.	Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit the full width of the required roadway, including shoulder and ditch slopes. Size openings of all cross drains shall be as required by the road superintendent. Cross drains shall be built on a straight line and grade, and shall be laid on a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with spigot ends pointing in the direction of the water flow. Ends shall be properly filled and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth, uniform invert. Plains shall be placed at sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the grain pipe be less than one foot below the roadway base. 
c.	Drainage ditches shall be constructed along both sides of the roadway. All ditches shall be two feet deep and have an invert of two feet. The front slope of the ditch shall have a horizontal-to-vertical slope ratio of not less than 3:1, and a back slope of not less than 2:1. All ditches shall be stabilized to retard erosion. 
d.	Concrete side drains with size openings of not less than 15 inches shall be installed to provide for surface water drainage under all driveways. Installation shall be as required for cross drains. 
(4)	Roadway base and shoulder. The minimum type of roadway base and shoulder material allowed shall be topsoil, sand-clay, or chert which shall have physical properties equivalent to that required for Class B materials gradation contained in the state department of transportation specifications, section 814.01. 
a.	Base material shall be spread in a manner such that right-of-way slopes and ditches will not be damaged, such that a smooth and uniform surface will be produced. 
b.	Base materials shall be applied consistent with the procedures set forth in the state department of transportation specifications, sections 303.01 to 303.05, inclusive. For residential land service road the roadway and shoulder base shall have a minimum compacted depth of six inches. For nonresidential land service, the corresponding minimum compacted depth shall be eight inches. 
(5)	Prime coat. All finished base surfaces shall have a bituminous prime coat applied before surface treatment materials is spread. The minimum acceptable prime coat material shall be cutback asphalt of a grade as required by the county road superintendent based on temperature and the texture of the base surface. The prime coat shall be applied at the rate of 0.025 of a gallon per square yard of base. Application of the prime coat shall be consistent with state department of transportation specifications, section 412.04. 
(6)	Surface treatment. After the prime coat has been properly cured, a permanent wearing surface shall be applied to the roadway base. For residential land service roads, the minimum acceptable wearing surface shall consist of A Type I bituminous treatment using stone, size five, aggregate with a bituminous seal using stone, size seven and 90, aggregate. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the provisions of state department of transportation specifications, sections 424.01 to 424.06, inclusive. 
a.	In lieu of this bituminous treatment, the wearing surface of residential land service roads may consist of hot mix asphaltic concrete, Type E of F, including bituminous material, rolled and compressed to a thickness of not less than 1½ inches. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the provisions of state department of transportation specifications, sections 400.01 to 400.08, inclusive. 
b.	For all nonresidential land service roads, the minimum acceptable wearing surface shall consist of a Type I bituminous surface treatment using stone, size six, aggregate with a seal of hot asphaltic concrete, Type E, including bituminous material, rolled and compress to a minimum thickness of 1½ inches. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the provisions of state department of transportation specifications, sections 424.01 to 424.06, inclusive, and sections 400.01 to 400.08, inclusive. 
(7)	Control of work and inspections. The road superintendent shall have the authority to control the construction of all residential and nonresidential land service roads. In exercising such authority, the road superintendent shall decide all questions concerning the acceptability of materials and construction methods. The road superintendent shall have the authority to inspect all construction work done and materials used to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Whenever the road superintendent finds that materials and/or work performed are not in compliance with this Code, he may require the removal, replacement, or otherwise require the correction of the nonconformity. The road superintendent however may not waive or reduce the requirements of any provisions of this Code. 
Secs. 74-252—74-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 74-281. - Block lengths and widths. 
Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
(2)	Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major thoroughfares, limited-access highways, or railroads, or where other situations make this requirement impossible. 
Sec. 74-282. - Lot sizes. 
(a)	Residential lots shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements of chapter 94. 
(b)	Where individual septic tanks are used, the planning commission shall prescribe minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards. 
(c)	Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet all the year requirements specified in chapter 94. 
Sec. 74-283. - Building lines. 
A building line meeting the front yard requirements of the zoning regulations shall be established on all lots. 
Sec. 74-284. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use. 
Secs. 74-285—74-301. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-302. - Frontage and area. 
A manufactured home park shall front for at least 100 feet on a major thoroughfare and shall have a minimum area of at least five buildable acres. 
Sec. 74-303. - Entrances and exits. 
The entrances and exits to the park shall be only from the major thoroughfare on which it fronts. Entrance and exit streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 60 feet and a surfaced width of at least 28 feet for a distance of at least 100 feet and shall be deemed an interior street thereafter. 
Sec. 74-304. - Park boundary treatment. 
(a)	A manufactured home park shall be bounded with a ten-foot planting screen easement buffer strip along all of the exterior lot lines of the park not bordering the major thoroughfares but not extending into a front yard. 
(b)	The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight feet high and provide an effective visual screen. 
Sec. 74-305. - Manufactured home park interior street and driveways. 
(a)	Minor interior streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 40 feet unless a greater width for drainage purposes is required. Minimum surface width shall be 28 feet. 
(b)	Driveways on individual manufactured home lots shall be at least eight feet wide with an additional two feet if the driveway also serves as a walk. 
(c)	All manufactured home structures shall observe the required front yard setback from a public street. 
Sec. 74-306. - Manufactured home park walks. 
(a)	Common sidewalks at least 3½ feet wide shall be provided connecting the individual manufactured homes with each other and with the recreation, management or service areas. 
(b)	Walks at least two feet wide shall be provided on each lot to connect the manufactured home with a common walk. 
Sec. 74-307. - Manufactured home lots. 
(a)	Manufactured home lots shall have a minimum area of 3,000 square feet. There shall not be more than eight lots per gross acre. 
(b)	Manufactured home stands shall be at least ten feet from a manufactured home park interior street, common sidewalk or common parking area. 
(c)	There shall be at least 20 feet of open space between manufactured homes with their appurtenant structures and between manufactured homes and other structures. 
Sec. 74-308. - Automobile parking. 
(a)	No automobile parking shall be permitted on entrance or exit portions of an interior street. 
(b)	At least 1.5 automobile parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home lot. The parking spaces shall be provided on the individual manufactured home lots or on on-street parking lanes or bays or on off-street parking lots located within 200 feet of the manufactured homes they serve. 
Sec. 74-309. - Recreation areas. 
At least 100 square feet of common recreation space per manufactured home lot shall be provided. Each recreation area provided shall contain at least 2,500 square feet. 
Sec. 74-310. - Additional approval required. 
(a)	The manufactured home park shall meet the requirement of chapter 94. 
(b)	The manufactured home park shall be approved by the county board of health as meeting the pertinent provisions of the "Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodation" established by the state department of public health, November 6, 1967. 
(c)	All streets, walks and manufactured home stands shall have a smooth, hard and dense surface that is properly drained and durable under normal use and weather conditions and which meets specifications established by the city and has its approval. 
Secs. 74-311—74-338. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 74-339. - Required. 
(a)	Prior to the approval of the final plat, an agreement shall have been reached between the subdivider or his agent and the city government with regard to the installation of street improvements and utilities called for on the subdivision plat. 
(b)	The subdivider shall be required to have installed by the appropriate city agency at his expense or, with approval of the agency concerned, to himself install the following street improvements and utilities: 
(1)	Thoroughfares, streets, etc. Except on major thoroughfares or limited-access streets, street grading, street paving, and curbs and gutters. 
(2)	Water facilities. 
a.	General requirements. 
1.	Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
2.	Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to the specifications of the state or local authorities. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter. 
3.	Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially designated agency of the state government. 
4.	To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing the same shall be included in the performance bond to be furnished by the developer. 
b.	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the applicable protection unit. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
(3)	Sewerage facilities. 
a.	General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the local government construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the city's consulting engineer, health department, and other appropriate agency. Plans shall be approved by the above agencies. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a sanitary sewer district for the purpose of providing sewerage facilities to the subdivision, where no district exists for the land to be subdivided. 
b.	High-density residential and nonresidential districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by approving officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities, including the installation of laterals in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the health officer, city's consulting engineer, and appropriate state agency. 
c.	Low- and medium-density residential districts. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
1.	Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, the applicant shall connect with the same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
2.	Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed five years), the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives: 
i.	Central sewerage system. The maintenance cost to be assessed against each property benefitted. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer mains; or 
ii.	Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
3.	Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant may install sewerage systems as follows: 
i.	In medium-density residential districts, a central sewerage system only. No individual disposal system will be permitted. Where plans exist for a public sewer system to be built, for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant shall install all sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
ii.	In low-density residential districts, individual disposal systems or central sewerage systems shall be used. 
d.	Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewerage disposal system. 
e.	Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of chapter 94 and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the local county sanitarium and the results submitted to the health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county sanitarium. 
f.	Design criteria for sanitary sewers. 
1.	Deviations allowed. These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances where considered justified by the city's consulting engineer. 
2.	Design factors. Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewerage and industrial waster together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area using the following criteria: 

 
These design factors shall apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller than 1,000 acres shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor of .01 c.f.s./acre for an area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by the city's consulting engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be .01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed by the city's consulting engineer. 
3.	Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
4.	Minimum size. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter. 
5.	Minimum slope. All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities when flowing full of not less than 2.7 feet per second. All velocity and flow calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula using an N value of 0.013. The design slopes shall be evenly divisible by four. The slopes shall be minimum for the size indicated. Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral sewers serving under 30 houses. Said sewers shall have a minimum slope of 0.76 percent. Where lateral sewers serve less than ten houses, the minimum slope shall be not less than one percent. (See Table 2.) 
Table 2. Minimum Slopes For Sewer Size Indicated 

 
6.	Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the city's consulting engineer. 
7.	Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and smaller, and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger. 
8.	Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches except where required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the city's consulting engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the city's consulting engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special considerations; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that indicated in this subsection. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the large one. The minimum drop through manholes shall be 0.2 feet. 
9.	Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in an easement on private property, access shall be to all manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than six feet of cover shall be provided over top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or three feet in all other areas. 
10.	Cleanouts and lampholes. Cleanout and lampholes will not be permitted. 
11.	Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures. 
12.	Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two feet above the sewer. 
(4)	Sidewalks. 
a.	Required improvements. 
1.	Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-of-way of all roads as shown in table 3. 
2.	Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are required by these regulations or where required in the discretion of the planning commission. 
3.	Sidewalks shall be constructed as noted in table 3. A median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. 
b.	Pedestrian accesses. The planning commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Easement shall be indicated on the plat. 
Table 3. Sidewalks Required 

 
*Optional, but where provided four feet minimum on either side of road with concrete curbs. 
**Optional, but where provided five feet minimum on either side of road with concrete curbs. 
(5)	Utilities. 
a.	Location. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are located aboveground, except where existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the planning commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use. 
b.	Easements. 
1.	Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal), such easements shall be at least ten feet wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties. 
2.	Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(6)	Public uses. 
a.	Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas. 
1.	Recreation standards. The planning commission shall require that land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes in locations designated on the master plan or otherwise where such reservations would be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character and shall have adequate road access, for the particular purposes envisioned by the planning commission. The area shall be shown and marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes." When recreation areas are required, the planning commission shall determine the number of acres to be reserved from the following table, which has been prepared on the basis of providing three acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling units. The planning commission may refer such proposed reservations to the local government official or department in charge of parks and recreation for recommendation. The developer shall dedicate all such recreation areas to the local government as a condition of final subdivision plat approval. 
Table 4. Table of Recreation Requirements 

 
For multifamily and high-density residential, the planning commission shall determine the acreage for reservation based on the number of dwelling units per acre to occupy the site as permitted by chapter 94. 
2.	Minimum size of park and playground reservations. In general, land reserved for recreation purposes shall have an area of at least four acres. When the percentages from table 4 would create less than four acres, the commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than two acres be reserved for recreation purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area. Where recreation land in any subdivision is not reserved, or the land reserved is less than the percentage in subsection (6)a.1 of this section, the provisions of subsection (6)a.4 of this section shall be applicable. 
3.	Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry; and shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by the planning commission, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond. A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than 200 feet in depth. The planning commission may refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to the local government official or department in charge of parks and recreation for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the local government for park purposes shall have prior approval of the mayor and city council and shall be shown marked on the plat "Reserved for Park and/or Recreation Purposes." 
4.	Alternative procedure: money in lieu of land. Where, with respect to a particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this section does not equal the percentage of total land required to be reserved in subsection (6)a.1 of this section, the planning commission shall require, prior to final approval of the subdivision plat, that the applicant deposit with the mayor and city council a cash payment in lieu of land reservation. Such deposit shall be placed in a neighborhood park and recreation improvement fund to be established by the mayor and city council. Such deposit shall be used by the local government for improvement of a neighborhood park, playground, or recreation area including the acquisition of property. Such deposit must be used for facilities that will be actually available to and benefit the persons in said subdivision and be located in the general neighborhood of the subdivision. The planning commission shall determine the amount to be deposited, based on the following formula: $200.00 multiplied by the number of times the total area of the subdivision is divisible by the required minimum lot size of the development standards district in which it is located, less a credit for the amount of land actually reserved for recreation purposes, if any, as the land reserved bears in proportion to the land required for reservation in subsection (6)a.1 of this section, but not including any lands reserved through density development standards. 
5.	Applicability to land utilizing/average density. Any subdivision plat in which the principle of average density of flexible zoning has been utilized shall not be exempt from the provisions of this section, except as to such portion of land which is actually dedicated to the local government for park and recreation purposes, if no further area, other than the area to be reserved through averaging, is required by the planning commission, the full fee shall be paid as required in subsection (6)a.4 of this section. If further land is required for reservation, apart from that reserved by averaging, credit shall be given as provided by subsection (6)a.4 of this section. 
6.	Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are minimum standards. None of the subsections in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this section. 
b.	Other public uses. 
1.	Plat to provide for public uses. Except when an applicant utilizes planned unit development or density development standards in which land is set aside by the developer as required by the provisions of chapter 94, whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a school, recreation uses in excess of the requirements of subsection (6)a of this section, or other public use as indicated on the master plan or any portion thereof, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into his preliminary plat. After proper determination of its necessity by the planning commission and the appropriate local government official or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site and a determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into the preliminary and final plats. 
2.	Referral to public body. The planning commission shall refer the preliminary sketch plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The planning commission may propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition. 
3.	Notice of property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the planning commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public body. 
4.	Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 12 months of notification, in writing, from the owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 12 months shall result in the removal of the reserved designation from the property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations. 
(7)	Nonresidential subdivisions. 
a.	In general. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is districted for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision, with respect to such land, shall make such provision as the planning commission may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in chapter 94. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the planning commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the planning commission, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the master plan, official map, and chapter 94. 
b.	Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
1.	Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
2.	Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
3.	Special requirements may be imposed by the local government with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
4.	Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
5.	Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
Secs. 74-340—74-366. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 74-367. - Planning commission to approve. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be amended from time to time by the city government, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
Secs. 74-368—74-392. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 74-393. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required under any other statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 78-19. - Clerk to assist in assessing inventories. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to assist the tax assessors in obtaining any information available from the state concerning business inventories, in order that such inventories shall be assessed at actual value. 
(Ord. of 9-30-1992, § 16-1) 
Sec. 78-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ad valorem tax or property tax means a tax imposed upon the assessed value of property. 
Certified tax digest means an annual property tax digest certified by the tax commissioner. 
Mill means one one-thousandth of a United States dollar. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, that is established by the city council for the purpose of financing, in whole or in part, the taxing jurisdiction's expenses for its fiscal year. 
Roll-back rate means the millage rate levied in the fiscal year immediately preceding the new fiscal year, minus the millage equivalent of the values added by reassessment certified by the tax assessor. 
Taxing jurisdiction means the city exercising its power to levy ad valorem taxes. 
Values added by reassessments means values added to the certified tax digest as a result of revaluation of existing real property. 
(Ord. of 9-30-1992, § 16-3) 
Sec. 78-21. - Levy of ad valorem taxation on property. 
No millage for any fiscal year may be levied until the city adopts a resolution that specifies millage rate. On or before October 1 of each year, the tax commissioner shall certify to the city the assessed taxable value of property, by class of property and in total that is subject to taxation for that fiscal year. 
Sec. 78-22. - Millage rate beyond roll-back rate. 
(a)	If the city proposes to establish any millage rate that would require increase beyond the roll-back rate, the city shall advertise its intent to do so. This advertisement must be in the legal organ for the city and shall read: 
"The City of Ellaville, Georgia, has tentatively adopted a millage rate that will require an increase in property taxes by, (percentage increase over roll-back) percent. All concerned citizens are invited to the public hearing on this tax increase to be held at (place of meeting) on (date and time)." 
(b)	The advertisement shall appear at least one week prior to the hearing and shall be prominently displayed and shall not be placed in that section of the newspaper where legal notices appear. 
Sec. 78-23. - Adoption of millage resolution. 
The resolution to set current fiscal year millage may be adopted at any public meeting at any time after the public hearing, but not later than September 15 of each year. 
(Ord. of 9-30-1992, § 16-4) 
Sec. 78-24. - Enforcement of property taxes. 
(a)	Statutory procedure adopted. The city shall utilize the procedures provided for judicial in rem tax foreclosure as contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-75 through 48-4-81, the provisions of which are adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. The statutory procedure may be used for the collection of any and all ad valorem taxes assessed against real property within the city that remain unpaid for a period of 12 months following the date upon which the taxes initially become delinquent. 
(b)	In rem proceeding only. Any proceedings filed in accordance with this article shall be designed solely to enforce the lien for ad valorem taxes against the property subject to such taxation, and shall not constitute an action for personal liability for such taxes against the owner of the subject property. 
(c)	Clerk as tax collector. For purposes of proceedings filed in superior court in enforcing this article, the city tax collector shall be construed as meaning the city clerk. 
(d)	Examination of title. Prior to filing a proceeding in the superior court pursuant to this article, the tax collector shall cause the city attorney to check the title to the property that is subject to the ad valorem tax levy and report to the tax collector the name of the owner of the subject property and any other interested parties as defined by state law. The city attorney shall also provide to the tax collector a legal description of the subject property. 
(e)	Nonexclusive remedy. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from proceeding to collect delinquent ad valorem taxes in another manner or pursuant to another provision of this Code or a state statute. The methods for collection of ad valorem taxes provided in this article are not exclusive, but are merely cumulative of the methods by which the city may collect taxes pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 9-30-1992, § 16-5; Ord. of 11-6-1995(1)) 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Authority to regulate traffic. 
The authority to make and enforce all rules and regulations governing traffic and the use of the streets of the city by vehicles and pedestrians, shall be vested in the mayor and council, and the mayor and council shall have full power to designate directions of traffic, time limits, and locations for parking, reservation of parking places, maximum and minimum speeds, insofar as the same shall not conflict with the laws of the state, to establish through streets, truck routes, and stop crossings, and to install such street signs and indicators and markings as shall be necessary or advisable for the operation and enforcement of such rules and regulations. No such rule or regulation shall be effective unless and until appropriate signs, indicators or markings are installed. 
Sec. 82-2. - Posting of truck restrictions; applicability. 
All city streets having truck restrictions shall have a sign, "No Trucks Over 10 Wheels," and shall not apply to trucks traveling to or from any business. 
Secs. 82-3—82-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 82-25. - Muffler required, noise producing devices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the city without said vehicle being equipped with a muffler which emits no offensive noise, or to operate a motor vehicle equipped with mufflers commonly known as smitties, clear or gutted mufflers or exhaust systems equipped with cutouts, or with noise making devices attached to the tailpipe, such as spark plugs, or inner tubes or any other noise making device. 
Sec. 82-26. - Funeral processions to be identified. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a type designated by the chief of police, or by burning lights. 
Secs. 82-27—82-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 82-56. - Placement of electric traffic control devices. 
As an aid in facilitating the movement of traffic on the streets of the city and in reducing accidents, the chief of police and the city superintendent are hereby authorized and directed to place and maintain electric traffic control devices and signals at such locations as may be designated from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 82-57. - Placement of other traffic control devices. 
The chief of police shall place and maintain other traffic control devices when and as required under this article and other traffic ordinances of the city and, with the approval of the mayor and council, may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, guide, or warn traffic. 
Secs. 82-58—82-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 82-88. - Reasonable and prudent speeds required. 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
Sec. 82-89. - Speed restrictions. 
(a)	Where no special hazard exists, the speeds established in this section shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of such a limit shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful. Further, the fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the speeds established in this section shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance, on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. Subject to those conditions, the speed limits in the city are as follows generally: 
(1)	Fifteen miles per hour in passing hospitals and in passing schools while schools are in session and in passing churches during the hours of service therein. 
(2)	Twenty-five miles per hour within the corporate limits, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(3)	Thirty-five miles per hour within the zones designated, and when signs are posted at either end of the speed zone. 
(4)	Twenty miles per hour on Buena Vista Street from its intersection with SR-3 to its intersection with Old Buena Vista Road. 
(b)	Speed limits on the state route system shall be as follows: 
(1)	SR-3 (U.S.-19) from the south city limits (M.P. 5.36) northerly for a distance of 3,643 feet (M.P. 605), a distance of 0.69 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(2)	SR-3 (U.S.-19) from a point 3,643 feet north of the south city limits (M.P. 605) to a point 200 feet north of Central of Georgia Railroad (M.P. 6.84), a distance of 0.79 mile, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(3)	SR-3 (U.S.-19) from a point 200 feet north of the Central of Georgia Railroad (M.P. 6.84) to the north city limits (M.P. 7.45), a distance of 0.61 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(4)	SR-26 from the west city limits (M.P. 5.43) to Johnson Street (M.P. 6.07), a distance of 0.64 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(5)	SR-26 from Johnson Street (M.P. 6.07) to Hayes Avenue (M.P. 7.03), a distance of 0.96 mile, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(6)	SR-26 from Hayes Avenue (M.P. 7.03) to east city limits (M.P. 7.48), a distance of 0.45 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(7)	SR-153 from the west city limits (M.P. 7.35) to the intersection of SR-3 (M.P. 7.65), a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(8)	SR-228 from SR-3 (M.P. 0.00) to a point 100 feet east of the Central of Georgia Railroad (M.P. 0.14), a distance of 0.14 mile, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(9)	SR-228 from SR-3 (M.P. 0.00) to a point 100 feet east of the Central of Georgia Railroad (M.P. 0.14), a distance of 0.14 mile, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(10)	SR-228 from a point 100 feet east of the Central of Georgia Railroad (M.P. 0.14) to the east city limits (M.P. 0.93), a distance of 0.79 mile to be zoned for 45 mph. 
Signs are to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(c)	Speed limits off the state route system shall be as follows: 
(1)	Dixon Road from the south city limits to Eastside Avenue, a distance of 0.35 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(2)	Spivey Street from SR-26 to Railroad Street, a distance of 0.59 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(3)	Spivey Street from Railroad Street to North city limits, a distance of 0.34 mile, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(4)	Briarwood Drive from Westwood Drive to South Hill Street, a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(5)	Buena Vista Street from Natalie Lane to SR-3, a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(6)	Callaway Drive from SR-3 to Ebenezer Road, a distance of 0.66 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(7)	Cora Drive from Battle Street to the east city limits, a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(8)	Ebenezer Road from southwest city limits to South Hill Street, a distance of 0.60 mile, to be zoned for 45 mph. 
(9)	Ebenezer Road from South Hill Street to SR-3, a distance of 0.32 mile, to be zoned for 35 mph. 
(10)	Edgewood Drive from Ebenezer Road to Briarwood Drive, a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(11)	Hayes Avenue from SR-26 to Ellis Street, a distance of 0.48 mile, to be zoned for 40 mph. 
(12)	Hill Street from Ebenezer Road to Buena Vista Street, a distance of 0.46 mile, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(13)	Industrial Drive from SR-3 to SR-228, a distance of 0.63 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(14)	King Road from Spivey Street to the east city limits, a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(15)	Meadow Drive from SR-228 to the dead end, a distance of 0.30 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(16)	Old Buena Vista Road from the west city limits to Mikewill Road, a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(17)	Old Buena Vista Road from Mikewill Road to Buena Vista Street, a distance of 0.29 mile, to be zoned for 20 mph. 
(18)	Pine Drive from Ebenezer Road to Ebenezer Road, a distance of 0.41 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(19)	Thompson Street from SR-228 to Spivey Street, a distance of 0.80 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(20)	Stevens Street from Ebenezer Road to Buena Vista Street, a distance of 0.55 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(21)	Westwood Drive from the southwest city limits to SR-26, a distance of 0.53 mile, to be zoned for 25 mph. 
(22)	Northside Drive from Spivey Street, to Pine Street a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned for 30 mph. 
(23)	Buena Vista Street from its intersection with SR-3 to its intersection with Old Buena Vista Road shall be zoned 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2004(2)) 
Secs. 82-90—82-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RULES OF THE ROAD 

Sec. 82-107. - Uniform rules of the road adopted by reference. 
The Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified, or amended, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
Secs. 82-108—82-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 82-128. - Angle and parallel parking. 
On streets where white lines are shown for guidance, parking must conform to the lines. The driver must park his vehicle entirely within the boundaries designated by such lines. No person shall park and leave unattended a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of vehicles within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking and on such streets, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the edge of the roadway indicated by such marks or sign. 
Sec. 82-129. - No parking zones. 
It shall be unlawful for vehicles of any type to be parked in designated no parking zones. The following are designated as no parking zones: 
(1)	The segment of the street or highway known as State Route 3 (Broad Street) beginning at the point 320 feet south of Callaway Street and continuing to College Street on each side thereof shall be designated and hereby designated as a no parking area, except for that area in front of Ellaville Baptist Church on the east side of the building only. 
(2)	The section of street or highway known as State Route 26 beginning at Snider Street and running to State Route 3 (Broad Street) shall be and the same is hereby designated as a no parking area. 
(3)	The curbline on both sides of the designated streets in subsections (1) and (2) of this section are to be painted yellow and are to be marked with appropriate no parking signs and shall be thereby designated as no parking areas. 
Secs. 82-130—82-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 82-157. - Street use restricted. 
The use of certain city streets by trucks and equipment weighing 2,400 pounds or more constitutes a hazard to other traffic and heavy trucks and machinery and causes unnecessary wear and tear on the surfaces of the streets. Trucks and equipment weighing 2,400 pounds or more have other and sufficient routes upon which to negotiate passage through the city. Therefore, the use of Old Buena Vista Road, College Street, Church Street west of U.S. 19, Pecan Street, North Hill Street and all of Stevens Street, is prohibited to truck and equipment weighing 2,400 pounds or more and to machinery used for commercial purposes. 
Sec. 82-158. - Posting of weight restrictions. 
Sufficient notice of such prohibition will be posted along said streets in a plain and visible manner. 
Sec. 82-159. - City vehicles excepted. 
There is excepted from the provisions of this article the use of the streets by vehicles owned by the city and by vehicles owned by and used in the normal course of business by public utilities. 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Tampering with equipment; penalties. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the city water, wastewater, or electric facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. In addition, any person violating this provision shall, in addition to other penalties that may be imposed, be subject to fines as provided in section 1-10, but not less than $150.00 for the first offense. A conviction of a second violation of this chapter shall, in addition to other applicable penalties, result in permanent disconnection from city water and sewer systems. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 7.1; Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-12) 
Sec. 86-2. - Right of entry. 
Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties that the city holds an easement on or through, or to which the city provides water, wastewater, or electric services, for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water or wastewater facilities lying within a city easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an easement granted to the city, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 4.13, 8.3) 
Sec. 86-3. - Approval of system changes. 
All additions to the water, wastewater, electric or storm sewerage system must be evaluated and approved by either the designated city official of the utility or the city's consulting engineer. The contractor or developer shall pay the cost of the consulting engineer's evaluation. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 86-4. - Pipe sizing; engineering costs. 
All pipe sizing will be done by the designated city official. All engineering costs will be billed to the customer at invoice cost. All staking and grade work that the city is not able to do will be done by the city's engineer and billed to the customer at invoice cost. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1999, § 18-3) 
Secs. 86-5—86-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USER CHARGES 

Sec. 86-29. - Water, wastewater, and electric charges. 
The city shall fix and collect water, wastewater, and electric service charges from customers. The charges shall be as determined from time to time by the city council, and shall be published separately from this Code. The revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement, and other authorized expenses. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 11.1) 
Sec. 86-30. - Billing; delinquent fees. 
Bills to customers for water, sewer, and electric service shall be mailed out on the day of each month as may be determined by the city. Bills shall be due and penalties assessed as follows: 
(1)	All utility bills are due by 5:00 p.m. on the 15th of each month. A ten percent penalty is added to all unpaid bills after 5:00 p.m. 
(2)	Any utility bills not paid in full, including the ten percent, by 5:00 p.m. on the 18th of each month will be disconnected on the 19th of each month. 
(Ord. of 11-11-1991, § 18-19(c); Ord. of 6-14-2004, §§ 18-9, 18-19) 
Sec. 86-31. - Disconnection of wastewater services. 
The city reserves the right to terminate wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the systems when: 
(1)	Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)	A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)	The customer: 
a.	Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.	Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.	Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.	Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 12.1) 
Sec. 86-32. - Disconnection of water and electric service. 
The city reserves the right to discontinue water or electric service without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)	To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)	Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)	Emergency repairs. 
(4)	Insufficiency of water or electricity supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)	Legal process. 
(6)	Direction of public authorities. 
(7)	Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, §§ 18-10, 18-20) 
Sec. 86-33. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)	Time and place for making complaint. If the consumer believes his utility bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. 
(b)	Complaints made after delinquency. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. 
(c)	Payment under protest. The consumer may pay the bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(d)	Special meter reading; fee. The city will make a special meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee as established by the city council; provided, however, that if the special reading discloses that the meter was misread, no charge shall be made. 
(e)	Meter testing. Meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city for the actual cost of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to be over-registered beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(f)	Broken seal; malfunctioning meter. If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills or from other proper data. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-11) 
Sec. 86-34. - Security deposits; disconnection for nonpayment. 
(a)	When required; amount. The city may require security deposits as a condition of supplying water, wastewater, or electric service. The security deposit shall be in the amount established by the city council. 
(b)	Refund. When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(c)	Application of deposit to delinquent charges. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer. However, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(d)	Reconnection; additional deposit. Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills, will be restored only after bills are paid in full and the security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-20) 
Sec. 86-35. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or writing to the city to discontinue water, wastewater, or electric service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all charges up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for services consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-8) 
Secs. 86-36—86-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-47—86-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 86-59. - General penalty; liability for damages. 
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Further, any person violating any of the provisions of articles I through IV of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.1) 
Sec. 86-60. - Additional remedies. 
(a)	Injunctive relief. In addition to other applicable penalties as set forth herein, the violation of any provision of articles I through IV of this chapter may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(b)	Abatement of public nuisance. In addition to other applicable penalties as set forth herein, any violation of articles 1 through IV of this chapter may, at the discretion of the health officer, be declared a public nuisance, injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort, and may be abated by appropriate legal proceeding. 
(c)	Remedies are nonexclusive. Actions for injunctive relief or abatement of public nuisance may be maintained for violations of articles I through IV of this chapter notwithstanding the fact that the violation also constitutes a crime and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.4) 
Secs. 86-61—86-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 86-79. - Notice to owner. 
(a)	Verbal notice. In the event of a violation of articles I through IV of this chapter, the health officer or other authorized city employee may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. 
(b)	Written notice. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or other authorized city employee may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action required, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. 
(c)	Evidence of notice. The record of the mailing of the notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of the owner to receive the same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(d)	Effect of absence of written notice. Compliance with articles I through IV of this chapter is required, notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued to the violator. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.2) 
Sec. 86-80. - Failure of owner to correct violation. 
Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or other authorized city employee pursuant to articles I through IV of this chapter will constitute a separate misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.3) 
Sec. 86-81. - Demand for hearing. 
(a)	Applicability. The hearing as provided herein shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, or policies as set forth in articles I through IV of this chapter. 
(b)	Filing of demand for hearing. Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of articles I through IV of this chapter or a directive of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease issued pursuant to this article, the owner of any premises affected may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's determination. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The demand for a hearing must be filed with the city clerk and be made within five days from the receipt of the determination being challenged. 
(c)	Scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for the hearing, to be not less than 21 days from the date of the filing of the demand. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.5) 
Sec. 86-82. - Evidence at hearing. 
Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to articles I through IV of this chapter shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.6) 
Sec. 86-83. - Standards for determination. 
For the purposes of this article, the decision of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 10.7) 
Secs. 86-84—86-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in articles I through IV of this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approval laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting, expressly or implicitly, with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through the system. The terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Designated city official means the person who is designated by the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state that will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer system within the city and adjacent areas of the county. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body or surface of groundwater. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD 5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a fly-tight slab on which is securely located a fly-tight riser covered with hinged fly-tight seat and lid. 
Premises, as used in this chapter, means all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to the degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)	A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)	A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage is the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater," as defined herein. 
Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Sludge means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer ) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source, and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by the EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the stand-point of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996) 
Sec. 86-111. - Other applicable law. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500 (33 USC 1292) shall be considered as a part of this chapter upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 9.1) 
Sec. 86-112. - Conflict of law or regulation. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use chapter for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 13.3) 
Sec. 86-113. - Sewer charges and fees. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the sewer service of the city shall pay a connection fee as established by the city council. All additional pipe and man-hours to run to a customer's property will be paid for by the customer at time of completion of work. 
Sec. 86-114. - Sewerage charges related to filling of swimming pools. 
(a)	A residential homeowner that is a water and sewerage customer of the city and who has either an in-ground or above-ground swimming pool shall be entitled to fill the swimming pool using city water without being required to pay city sewerage charges for water used to fill the swimming pool upon the following conditions, and through the following procedure: 
(1)	The homeowner must provide written evidence to the city of the capacity of the pool in gallons; 
(2)	The homeowner must provide written evidence to the city as to the actual amount of water used to fill the pool; 
(3)	The homeowner must provide written evidence of the date upon which the pool was filled under this article; 
(4)	The elimination of the sewerage charge for water used to fill swimming pools under this section shall only be allowed for one filling of the residential homeowner's pool each calendar year. 
(b)	Any residential homeowner who desires to eliminate the sewerage charge for water used for filling a swimming pool shall complete the written application for the sewerage charge reduction as may be required by the city clerk, and no such sewerage charge reduction under articles I through IV of this chapter shall be authorized unless the application is completed in its entirety. The completed application shall be filed by the residential homeowner with the city clerk. 
(c)	Any such application submitted by a residential homeowner under this section shall be submitted no later than ten calendar days prior to the end of the applicant's water/sewerage billing cycle, and any application submitted less than ten days prior to the end of the applicant's billing cycle shall be considered in connection with the next succeeding billing cycle. 
(d)	Upon a determination by the city clerk that the application is complete, that the facts set out in the application are accurate, and that the residential homeowner is entitled to the sewerage charge reduction as authorized in this article, the city shall deduct or eliminate the sewerage charge for the water used to fill the residential homeowner's pool from the monthly water and sewerage bill of the residential homeowner for the calendar month immediately following approval of the application from the homeowner. The appropriate city departments shall be authorized to assist the city clerk, review each application for elimination of the sewerage charge under this chapter and confirm that the facts set out in the application are accurate. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2006, § 18-30) 
Secs. 86-115—86-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 86-142. - Required. 
If the public sewer is within 1,000 feet of the property line, the owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities, as provided herein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 3.5) 
Sec. 86-143. - Time for compliance. 
In the event that the city discovers any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the city limits that is required to be, and is not, in compliance with articles I through IV of this chapter, the owner shall have 30 days after date of official notice to do so, to bring the property into compliance with articles I through IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 3.5) 
Sec. 86-144. - Toilet facilities; disposal of human excrement. 
All premises shall be provided by the owner with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 3.1, 3.2) 
Sec. 86-145. - Prohibited systems. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 3.4) 
Sec. 86-146. - Appliances and plumbing fixtures. 
All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 3.6) 
Secs. 86-147—86-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 86-176. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of articles I through IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 3.3) 
Sec. 86-177. - Unpolluted and sanitary discharges prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 6.1, 6.2) 
Sec. 86-178. - Chemical, toxic, corrosive and obstructing wastes prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Chemicals; explosives. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)	Toxic, poisonous, and hazardous substances. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)	Corrosive substances. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)	Obstructing substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of the size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.3) 
Sec. 86-179. - Restricted discharges. 
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer that shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)	Hot substances. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater that will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(2)	Oily substances. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)	Viscous substances or substances that solidify. Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 130 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)	Shredded garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	Industrial discharges. All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403) and those Industrial Pretreatment Standards developed by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(6)	Taste or odor producing substances. Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor producing substances exceeding limits that may be established by the city. 
(7)	Radioactive substances. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)	Sludge. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, that constitute a sludge as defined herein. 
(9)	Substances not amenable to treatment. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)	Substances that produce gases. Any water or wastes that, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)	Substances producing certain reactions. Materials that exert or cause: 
a.	Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.	Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine demand in the quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.4) 
Sec. 86-180. - Dilution prohibited; violation. 
Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials shall be considered a violation of articles I through IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.12) 
Sec. 86-181. - Options of city regarding restricted discharges. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers that contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 86-179 and that in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)	Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.5) 
Sec. 86-182. - Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
(a)	Required. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)	Specifications. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the designated city official and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(c)	Maintenance. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the designated city official. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.6) 
Sec. 86-183. - Monitoring facility. 
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable monitoring structure together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be imposed by the city on a case-by-case as needed basis. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.7) 
Sec. 86-184. - Information to be provided. 
Industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)	Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)	Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)	Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)	A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)	Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)	Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.8) 
Sec. 86-185. - No limitation on discretion of city. 
No statement contained in articles I through IV of this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.9) 
Sec. 86-186. - Monitoring and testing standards. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in articles I through IV of this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.10) 
Sec. 86-187. - Pretreatment plans for industrial wastes. 
Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat the wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the designated city official or the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the designated city official. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.11) 
Sec. 86-188. - Minimum pretreatment requirements. 
Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)	Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to ensure compliance with the regulations in this division at all times. 
(2)	Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the designated city official to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(3)	Maintenance. All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.11) 
Sec. 86-189. - Waiver of pretreatment requirements. 
There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of articles I through IV of this chapter, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the designated city official that can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.12) 
Sec. 86-190. - Disconnection of service upon violation; procedure. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of articles I through IV of this chapter shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)	Written notice. A written notice, signed by the designated city official, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city Code. 
(2)	Service of notice. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. 
(3)	Failure to comply; disconnection. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. 
(4)	Request for extension. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the notice referenced in subsection (2) of this section, and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the designated city official, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then he may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.13) 
Sec. 86-191. - Responsibilities of user. 
It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)	Monitoring structure. Build a monitoring and control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the city. 
(2)	Control or other manhole. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(3)	Notification of operation changes. Contact the designated city official prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(4)	Payment of user charges. Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings in the amounts provided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 6.14) 
Secs. 86-192—86-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 86-221. - Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.1) 
Sec. 86-222. - Permit application; fees. 
The owner or his agent shall make application for a permit on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the designated city official. A permit and inspection fee in the amount determined by the city council shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.2) 
Sec. 86-223. - Cost of installation and connection. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.3) 
Sec. 86-224. - Separate connections; exceptions. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.4) 
Sec. 86-225. - Using old connections for new construction. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city official, to meet all requirements of articles I through IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.5) 
Sec. 86-226. - Materials and construction specifications. 
(a)	Generally. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and any county regulations adopted or approved by the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(b)	Specific regulations. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within city supervision: 
(1)	The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
(2)	Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe, or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the designated city official where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the designated city official. 
(3)	The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the designated city official, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of the four inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(c)	Depth of trench; separate trench required. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(d)	Excavations; pipe laying; backfill. An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work, unless otherwise approved by the designated city official. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(e)	Joints and connections. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gaskets shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the designated city official. 
(f)	Place and manner of connection. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if the branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located Y branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth of a foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the designated city official. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.6) 
Sec. 86-227. - Connection elevation. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.7) 
Sec. 86-228. - Prohibited connections. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless the connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.8) 
Sec. 86-229. - Inspection of finished installation. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city official or his representative. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.9) 
Sec. 86-230. - Excavation safety; restoration of city property. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.10) 
Sec. 86-231. - Availability of connections; fees and costs. 
The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.11) 
Sec. 86-232. - Infiltration; inflow. 
If any sewer connection permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)	Require the owner to repair the sewer connection; 
(2)	Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; 
(3)	Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 5.13) 
Secs. 86-233—86-257. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 86-258. - When permitted. 
If a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of articles I through IV of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with city and state regulations. No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of the same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 4.1, 4.5, 4.8) 
Sec. 86-259. - Availability of public sewer. 
Any private wastewater system serving a property to which public sewer subsequently becomes available, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 4.6, 4.13) 
Sec. 86-260. - Operation and maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.7) 
Sec. 86-261. - Toilet facilities. 
Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.9) 
Sec. 86-262. - General specifications. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless in compliance with state law and approved by and in conformity with all regulations of the county health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.4) 
Sec. 86-263. - Septic tanks. 
(a)	Permit required. No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for the work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. 
(b)	Construction; maintenance. Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)	Inspection. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, §§ 4.2, 4.3) 
Sec. 86-264. - Limitation on location of septic tanks and pit privies. 
No septic tank or pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)	Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)	In areas where the designated city official deems the use of septic tanks or pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)	Where septic tank or pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)	Where the use of septic tanks or pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.10) 
Sec. 86-265. - Discharge of septic tanks into sewer system. 
(a)	Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening, into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage, or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Permits. The designated city official is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the designated city official and under his supervision. The permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the designated city official, continued dumping of the matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(c)	Charges; payment; failure to pay. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of the dumpings and statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of the statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within the ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.11) 
Sec. 86-266. - Notice of unsanitary operation. 
Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer that the system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that the system be corrected. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.12) 
Sec. 86-267. - Discretionary requirements. 
No statement contained in articles I through IV of this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the designated city official. 
(Ord. of 7-8-1996, § 4.14) 
Secs. 86-268—86-278. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-279—86-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 86-290. - Connection required for drinking water. 
No wells shall be allowed in the city to be used for the purpose of potable drinking water. All residential, commercial, and industrial structures within the city, situated within 1,000 feet of available city water service, shall be required to connect to the city's system, as determined by the city, unless otherwise specifically permitted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-6) 
Sec. 86-291. - Minimum charge; use of water. 
A minimum connection charge, as provided in the rate schedule established by the city council, shall be made for each water connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, except for fire protection. The city shall not, under any condition, furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-4) 
Sec. 86-292. - City's rights and responsibilities. 
(a)	Service adjacent to lines. The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)	Service not adjacent to lines. The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render the service. 
(c)	Installation of meter. The city shall install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)	Refusal to provide service. The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed so as to prevent cross connection or backflow. 
(e)	Notifications of service interruptions. Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-5) 
Sec. 86-293. - Consumer's responsibility, liability. 
(a)	Use of water restricted. Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard of this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)	Access to city's meter. Where meter or meter boxes are placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)	Double check valve. The consumer shall be required to maintain a double check valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)	Installation and maintenance. The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the city, county, and state. 
(e)	Disconnection of private wells. In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system, and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-6) 
Sec. 86-294. - Access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-7) 
Sec. 86-295. - Extensions of system; easements. 
Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city, a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-7) 
Secs. 86-296—86-306. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 86-307. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 86-308. - Construction restrictions. 
No construction, including construction that involves the repair or renovation of or in addition to any existing building, when the repair or renovation of or in addition to the existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both, whether residential or commercial, may be initiated within the city of the following types: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-value, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.50 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 86-309. - Exemption. 
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector of the city and paying the fee established by the city council for inspection and issuance of the exemption. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this division when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within the existing buildings; 
(2)	When the plumbing or sewage system within the existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)	The system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in the individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are specifically designed for use by the handicapped, specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution, or toilets for juveniles. 
(Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 86-310. - Enforcement; penalty. 
This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violation may be issued by the city's chief building inspector. Any person or other entity in violation of this division shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. of 2-11-1991, § 6) 
Secs. 86-311—86-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Sec. 86-330. - Applicability. 
The drought contingency plan set forth in this division shall become effective and implemented upon the advice and recommendation of the designated city official or upon instructions from the state. 
(Res. of 10-13-1966) 
Sec. 86-331. - Regulations. 
Upon declaration by the designated city official that this plan is to be implemented, the following regulations shall immediately apply and shall continue to apply until the city declares that implementation of the plan shall cease: 
(1)	There shall be no outside watering of any kind, including street cleaning, public fountains, park irrigation, watering lawns, gardens, shrubbery, etc. 
(2)	There shall be no commercial, public or private water use, such as swimming pools, and motor vehicle washing of any kind. 
(3)	There shall be no commercial and home laundry use except during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. only. 
(Res. of 10-13-1966, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 86-332. - Enforcement. 
Compliance with this drought contingency plan when activated, shall be in the following manner: 
(1)	Inspection. Duly authorized officers bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing. 
(2)	Written notice of first violation. Any person found to be violating the provisions of this resolution shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning for the violation. 
(3)	Disconnection and fine for second violation. On second violation, water service will be terminated and a reconnect fee in the amount established by the city council will be charged. 
(4)	Subsequent violations. For the third and all subsequent violations, the violator will be charged for each violation a reconnect fee equal to four times the reconnect fee for second violations. 
(Res. of 10-13-1966, §§ 1—3) 
Secs. 86-333—86-352. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 86-353. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this division is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within the zones. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1993, § 1) 
Sec. 86-354. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or hazardous material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)	Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1993, § 2) 
Sec. 86-355. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
The city has established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is feet. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1993, § 3) 
Sec. 86-356. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)	Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less one acre; and 
(2)	Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1993, § 4) 
Sec. 86-357. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not the use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 86-356. 
(1)	Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)	Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)	Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 86-356; 
(4)	Sanitary landfills; 
(5)	Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)	Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)	Underground storage tanks; 
(8)	Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1993, § 5) 
Sec. 86-358. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this division, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in chapter 94, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
Secs. 86-359—86-389. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRIC POWER 

Sec. 86-390. - Application for service; deposit. 
To connect to the city's electric service, the consumer shall make application for electric service, in person, at the city hall and at the same time, make a cash deposit in the amount established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-17) 
Sec. 86-391. - Connect, disconnect, and reconnect fees. 
The city shall impose connect, disconnect, and reconnect fees in the amounts established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2004, § 18-18) 
Sec. 86-392. - Irrevocable license granted to City of Ellaville for electric service line maintenance. 
(a)	With respect to any electric power line owned by the city which is either now or in the future located within the corporate limits of the city or which is otherwise a part of the city's electric distribution system, whether such electric power line is a primary service line or a secondary service line, upon installation of such line, the owner of the property, and any person or entity having any legal or equitable interest in said property, across which such primary service line or secondary service line runs above ground or below ground shall be considered to have granted to the city an irrevocable license to come upon the owner's property and repair and maintain such electric service lines from time to time. For the purposes of this section, reference to such repair and maintenance services shall specifically include, but shall not be limited to, the cutting or trimming of hedges, bushes, trees, and similar vegetation which the city determines are, or might become, a danger to such electric service lines or which might cause harm or damage to such lines. 
(b)	To the extent practicable and assuming no emergency situation, the city shall notify such property owners at least 48 hours in advance with respect to each period of time that the city deems it necessary or appropriate to come onto the property owner's property pursuant to the irrevocable license to perform the repair and maintenance services authorized by this section. Such notice may be in writing mailed or personally delivered by the city or its designee to the last known address of the property owner according to the city's electric service billing records, or personally delivered by the city or its designee to the owner or to the premises if the owner cannot be located at the time of such notice delivery. 
(c)	The decision of the city's electric service supervisor shall be final and binding upon the property owner as to the nature and the necessity of the repair and maintenance activities authorized hereunder; however, if the property owner refuses to authorize or allow the city to have access to the owner's property for such repair and maintenance services, and in the event that the power line is later damaged or destroyed, and such damage or destruction would not, by a preponderance of the evidence, have occurred if the owner had allowed the city to exercise its rights under the irrevocable license established in this section to undertake such repair and maintenance service (including, but not limited to, the removal of "danger trees"), as authorized in this section, then the property owner shall be obligated to pay one-half of the cost of repair or replacement of the damaged or destroyed line to the city, and such amount may be included upon the property owner's electric service bill, and collected by the city in the same manner as regular electric service bills are collected. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall be construed or held to create or establish any liability of any kind or nature on the part of the city with respect to electric service line repair and maintenance services that the city undertakes or fails to undertake. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
Chapter 90 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees, bushes, shrubs and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, §§ 1, 13) 
Secs. 90-2—90-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY TREE BOARD 

Sec. 90-21. - Members; appointment; compensation. 
The city has created and established a city tree board that shall consist of five members, all citizens and residents of the city. All members shall be appointed by the mayor, with approval of the council, and shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, §§ 2, 4) 
Sec. 90-22. - Terms of office; vacancies. 
The term of the five board members shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 90-23. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, develop or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The plan will be presented annually to the city council, and upon the council's acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report, and make recommendations regarding any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 90-24. - Operation. 
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 90-25. - Review by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council, who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 19) 
Sec. 90-26. - Interference with board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, spraying, pruning, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 17) 
Secs. 90-27—90-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-56. - Approved street tree species. 
The following list constitutes the official approved street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without permission of the city tree board. 

 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 7) 
Sec. 90-57. - Tree spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 90-56, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 8) 
Sec. 90-58. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 90-56, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 9) 
Sec. 90-59. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No street trees shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersection curbs or curblines. No street trees shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 10) 
Sec. 90-60. - Distance from utility lines and pipes. 
No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in section 90-56, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any undergroundwater line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 11) 
Sec. 90-61. - Tree planting, maintenance, and removal. 
(a)	Landscaping and public safety. The city shall plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)	Unsafe and injurious trees. The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewer, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(c)	Planting by property owners. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of trees is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 12) 
Sec. 90-62. - Tree topping prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other trees on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 13) 
Sec. 90-63. - Property owner duties. 
(a)	Pruning. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
(b)	Removal. Every owner of any tree adjacent to any street or right-of-way within the city shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 14) 
Sec. 90-64. - City pruning of privately owned trees. 
The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 14) 
Sec. 90-65. - City removal of privately owned trees. 
(a)	Dead and diseased trees. The city may cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease that constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. 
(b)	Notice to owner. The city tree board shall provide written notice to owners or persons responsible for maintenance of any dead or diseased trees subject to removal. Removal shall be done by the owners or persons responsible for maintenance, at their own expense, within 60 days after the date of the service of notice. 
(c)	Failure of owner to remove trees. In the event of the failure of owners or persons responsible for maintenance to comply with such provisions, the city shall remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 15) 
Sec. 90-66. - Persons responsible for tree maintenance. 
(a)	Generally. The owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed the party responsible for any nuisance occurring on his property. 
(b)	Multiunit buildings. If the property on which a nuisance exists includes a building containing between two and four living or business units or establishments, then the occupants of the living or business units or establishments shall be deemed the responsible party. 
(c)	Unit defined. A living or business unit or establishment is hereby defined as that portion of all of a building or structure that constitutes a separate and undivided family or business concern. 
(d)	Responsibility fixed by contract. If the lease or rental agreement or contract between the owner and the occupant specifically names the party responsible for the clearing or cutting of grass, weeds, or bushes, regardless of ownership and regardless of the number of living or business units or establishments on the premises, the specified party shall be held responsible for compliance with this section. 
Sec. 90-67. - Stump removal. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 10-12-1992, § 16) 
Secs. 90-68—90-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEED CONTROL 

Sec. 90-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Living unit , business unit and business establishment refer to that portion of all of a building that houses a separate and undivided family or business concern. 
Sec. 90-94. - Height restricted. 
The owner of any lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, within the city limits, shall not permit any grass, weeds, or wild bushes to grow to a height in excess of ten inches upon such property or premises. 
Sec. 90-95. - Responsible person. 
The person responsible for weed control shall be determined as set forth in section 90-66. 
Sec. 90-96. - Public nuisance; abatement. 
Any violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to the procedure for abatement set forth in chapter 38, health and sanitation, in addition to subjecting the responsible party to penalties as set forth in section 1-10. 
Chapter 94 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Enactment clause. 
The mayor and city council enacts this chapter under the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by the Georgia State Constitution. 
Sec. 94-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 94-3. - Intent. 
(a)	It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the uniform treatment of all housing classified as dwelling, single-family, to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of residential industrialized buildings and manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, as hereinafter set out, in all residential districts in which similar dwellings constructed on site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein, to ensure similarity in exterior appearance between such residentially designed manufactured homes and industrialized buildings and dwellings which have been constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same district, zoning classification or general area. 
(b)	Manufactured homes which do not conform to the standards established in the definition of dwelling, single-family and mobile homes, will be permitted in the agricultural districts and manufactured home community districts, provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and also as a special exception in all zoning districts as provided within this chapter. 
(c)	For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein are interpreted as follows: 
(1)	The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" or "parcel." 
(2)	The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
(3)	The term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or buildings, shall be construed to include the terms "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(4)	The term "map" or "districting map" means the official districting map of the city. 
(Ord. of. 3-9-1992, § 3.1.1) 
Sec. 94-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use or building means a use or building, sometimes referred to as a utility building, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Board of appeals means the board of appeals appointed by the city council to hear various appeals and other matters. 
Building means any structure intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels, also including utility buildings. 
Building, front line of, means the line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps. 
Centerline of streets means a line surveyed and monumented as such, or if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside lines of rights-of-way of the street. 
City of Ellaville means the mayor and city council as formally constituted by the Charter. 
Coverage means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building area. 
Development officer means the person appointed by the city council who is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Downtown area means the commercial district located at or near the center of the city, as noted on the current districting map. 
Dwelling means a building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families or individuals. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed or used as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other in a complete dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, one-family , means a structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use, which meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(1)	Minimum width in excess of 24 feet by 36 feet. 
(2)	Minimum square footage required by the zone in which located, as required by the board of appeals. 
(3)	The roof shall have a minimum 2½:12 roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, wood shingles, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or other materials approved by the building official. 
(4)	The exterior siding materials shall consists of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, lap metal or lap vinyl or other materials of like appearance. 
(5)	Be attached to a permanent foundation as required by the state building codes. 
(6)	Be constructed according to standards established either by the state minimum standard codes as amended from time to time or the standard building code if locally adopted for site-built homes, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act for manufactured homes, or the state Industrialized Buildings Act for the residential industrialized buildings. Each of these codes shall be applicable to the specific structure to which it applies. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boardinghouses or like uses. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as family. 
Feedlot means any parcel of land upon which the mechanical or handfeeding of five or more livestock animals per acre is performed for a period exceeding 30 days. 
Home occupation means any occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that: 
(1)	No more than two persons other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupations; 
(2)	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 30 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
(3)	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding four square feet in area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
(4)	Home occupations conducted in any accessory building shall not occupy an area larger than 30 percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling; 
(5)	No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; 
(6)	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
Junkyard means any accumulation or storage of junked vehicles, machinery equipment or appliances, vehicle or machinery parts, rags, litter or other debris in excess of 400 square feet in area. A junked vehicle is hereby defined as any vehicle which is inoperable for more than one month. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings, including accessory buildings or uses incidental to them, and including such open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
Lot, corner, means a parcel of land at the junction of, and fronting on, two or more intersecting streets. 
Lot, depth of , means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot of record means a lot which is duly recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
Lot, width means the mean width measured at right angle to its depth. 
Manufactured home means a structure defined by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. The definition at the date of adoption of this part is as follows: 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chasis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and complies with the standards established under this chapter. 
Manufactured home park means any parcel of land under single ownership designed to accommodate five or more manufactured homes to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or other facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on the property. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 12 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 480 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chasis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Other manufactured homes means any manufactured home not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part mode, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the Industrialized Buildings Act, 1982 Ga. Laws, pages 1637—1643, Part 1 of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-2. 
Modular structures means any structure which is prefabricated in part or whole and moved to the site for assembly. A modular type structure with attached wheels is considered a manufactured home. 
Planning commission means the planning commission appointed by the mayor and city council to review planning and districting matters. 
Sign means a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. 
Sign, off-premises, means a sign other than an on-premises sign. 
Sign, on-premises , means a sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-premises signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry to advertise products and the like located away from the premises. 
Sign, public or semipublic, directional, off-premises, means a sign which directs attention to a public or semipublic activity, such as a school, church, fraternal organization, or the like. Such signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area. 
Special exception use means a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the development district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to surrounding uses, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such development districts as special exception uses, if specific provision for such conditional uses is made in this chapter. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to the following: site buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising, signs, satellite dishes, and fall-out shelters. 
Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet and a length not exceeding 32 feet. A travel trailer is not considered a manufactured home. 
Variance means the relief granted by the board of appeals upon appeal in specific cases from the terms of this chapter. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except as permitted by this chapter. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear , means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the lot with a principal building located between the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 3.2) 
Secs. 94-5—94-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 94-25. - Districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into districts as designated: 
R-1 single-family residential district 
R-1MH single-family and manufactured home district 
R-2 multifamily residential district 
C-1 general commercial district 
I-1 general industrial district 
A-R agricultural-residential district 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 4.1) 
Sec. 94-26. - Districting map. 
The boundaries of the districts referenced in section 94-25 are hereby established as shown in the map entitled "The Districting Map of the City of Ellaville, Georgia." Said map is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be available for public inspection at the city hall together with applicable amendments. As evidence of its authenticity, the districting map and amendments shall be certified by the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 4.2) 
Sec. 94-27. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Unless otherwise specified, district boundary lines shall be property or lot lines, the centerlines of streets or such lines extended, a line midway between the main tracks of a railroad, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or the city limits. Such lines drawn or appearing on these lines are to be considered thereon. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the board of appeals may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 4.3) 
Secs. 94-28—94-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-58. - Use. 
Except as hereafter provided, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected and no existing building or structure or any part thereof shall be reconstructed or moved, nor shall any land, structure, or building be used or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.1) 
Sec. 94-59. - Height and density. 
Except as hereafter provided, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered to: 
(1)	Exceed the height limits. 
(2)	House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family. 
(3)	Have narrower or smaller front or side yards than are herein required. 
However, height limits of this chapter shall not apply to structures not intended for human occupancy such as church spires, flag poles, chimneys, monuments, radio or television towers or antennas, water towers or similar structures. The height limits shall apply to signs and billboards. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.2) 
Sec. 94-60. - Lot area and reduction of lot size. 
Except as hereafter provided, no lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.3) 
Sec. 94-61. - Space provisions. 
Except as hereafter provided, no part of a yard or other open space or any part of the off-street parking or loading space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for another building. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.4) 
Sec. 94-62. - Public street frontage. 
Except as hereafter provided, no building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.5) 
Sec. 94-63. - Corner lots. 
Except as hereafter provided, the side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front yard requirements for adjoining lots on the same street. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.6) 
Sec. 94-64. - One principal building on a lot. 
Except as hereafter provided, only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.7) 
Sec. 94-65. - Vision clearance. 
Except as hereafter provided, no sign, hedge or other obstacle to vision between the height of two and ten feet shall be placed within 20 feet of any street intersection right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.8) 
Sec. 94-66. - Front yard setback of dwellings. 
The front yard setback requirement of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and development district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setbacks of the adjoining buildings, and in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way upon which said lot fronts. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 5.9) 
Secs. 94-67—94-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 94-91. - Nonconforming uses. 
A nonconforming use shall include any building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its use, regulations and provisions. Such nonconforming uses may be continued, but shall not be: 
(1)	Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)	Extended or enlarged except in conformity with this chapter; 
(3)	Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; 
(4)	Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage has exceeded 50 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes, unless the nonconforming use has been presented to the board of appeals by the development officer whereupon a hearing shall be set, and a determination made that there is cause to grant a variance. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.1) 
Sec. 94-92. - Off-street automobile parking. 
At least one off-street parking space not less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in length with vehicular access to a public street shall hereafter be provided for: 
(1)	Each dwelling unit on a residential lot; 
(2)	Each manufactured home space in a developed manufactured home park; 
(3)	Each 250 square feet of total floor area for a retail commercial establishment, if on-street parking is not adequate; 
(4)	Each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift for any industrial activity; 
(5)	Each two employees at a gasoline service station, plus one space for each service bay; and 
(6)	1½ automobile spaces shall be provided for each unit in a multifamily dwelling. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.2) 
Sec. 94-93. - Off-street loading space. 
At least one off-street loading space not less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in length with vehicular access to a public street shall hereafter be provided for each retail business and for industrial use in addition to the required number of off-street parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.3) 
Sec. 94-94. - Site and development plan. 
For all development approvals, except for single-family and agricultural uses, a site and development plan shall be required. Three copies of the plan shall be submitted to the development officer with sufficient information to determine its compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The plan should include such things as parking, landscaping, utilities, proposed uses, drainage, signs, etc. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.4) 
Sec. 94-95. - Signs, numbers, and surface area. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the use and location of signs will be controlled in the following manner: 
(1)	In residential districts, no more than one on-site sign will be allowed for nonresidential use. Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall not be illuminated in any manner. The sign shall not be located within any required yard setback area unless attached to the building. 
(2)	In commercial, industrial and agricultural districts, on-site signs will be allowed. Such signs, when illuminated, will be arranged so as not to reflect light into residential areas. Such on-site signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in area and all other signs shall require a variance. All signs, except in the downtown area, shall have a minimum of a 15-foot setback unless attached to a building. 
(3)	All signs shall be designed to be harmonious with the surrounding structures and uses. 
(4)	These signs are expressly prohibited in all districts: illuminated sequential, flashing or oscillating signs, whether permanent or portable. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.5) 
Sec. 94-96. - Manufactured home parks. 
In manufactured home parks, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)	Each manufactured home space shall provide a minimum area of 3,000 square feet for singlewide manufactured homes and 4,500 for doublewide manufactured homes. 
(2)	No manufactured home shall be nearer than 20 feet from any neighboring manufactured home or interior road or nearer than 30 feet from an adjacent property line. 
(3)	A buffer in accordance with section 94-99 shall be required. 
(4)	Water and sanitary facilities shall be connected to each manufactured home, as required by the state department of human resources. 
(5)	A recreation area shall be developed for each park at a ratio of 20,000 square feet per five-acre park. 
(6)	Paved interior roadways shall be provided with adequate access to each manufactured home and public street. Interior roadways shall have a pavement of not less than 16 feet. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.6) 
Sec. 94-97. - Utility facilities. 
Utility, water and sanitary facilities shall be connected to each new dwelling, building and/or structure as required by the state department of human resources. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.7) 
Sec. 94-98. - Permanent foundations required. 
All dwelling units, including manufactured homes, shall be required to have permanent foundations and to be skirted within 60 days. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.8) 
Sec. 94-99. - Buffering and fencing. 
For all uses where a site and development plan is required under section 94-94, a buffer area shall be required. The buffer shall be in a five-foot wide area and shall be at least eight feet in height. The buffer may be in the form of walls, fences, or landscaping. The buffer may be required along the front, side and rear yard lines if necessary. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 6.9) 
Secs. 94-100—94-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 94-127. - Purpose. 
This article is established to ensure that each district is reserved primarily for its intended use, including public and semipublic uses which are necessary to serve the needs of the district. It is the intent of this article to promote that stability and character of land development, and to promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the community's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, art. VII) 
Sec. 94-128. - R-1 single-family residential district. 
The R-1 single-famiy residential district is composed chiefly of existing low-density single-family residential areas of the city and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage similar and complementary type residential development together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 7.1) 
Sec. 94-129. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses within the R-1 single-family residential district are: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings, except trailers or manufactured homes. 
(2)	Agriculture, excluding the commercial raising of livestock and poultry. 
(3)	Public municipal buildings, structures, or land uses. 
(4)	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 7.2) 
Sec. 94-130. - Special exception uses. 
Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated in this section may be permitted in the R-1 single-family residential district. The board may approve or deny such applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for manufactured homes used as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, are as follows: 
1.	A manufactured home qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for industrialized buildings used as single-family dwellings are as follows: Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. Approval shall be in accordance with section 94-178. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Guidelines for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used as residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts; provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home, when used as an accessory structure or dwelling, shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b1 and (3)b5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-134, 94-138, 94-142, 94-150 and 94-173, such as: 
1.	Day nurseries or kindergartens. 
2.	Public utility substations, if essential for the provision of service to the development district in which it is proposed to be located. 
3.	Churches. 
4.	Public and private schools. 
5.	Recreational developments including, but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. 
6.	Duplexes. 
7.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 7.3) 
Sec. 94-131. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: 

 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 7.4) 
Sec. 94-132. - R-1 MH single-family and manufactured home residential district. 
(a)	On March 13, 1990, the Georgia Supreme Court rendered a decision in Cannon vs. Coweta County. In the decision, the court noted, "That a per se restriction (on mobile homes) is invalid; if a particular mobile home is excluded from areas other than mobile home parks, it must be because it fails to satisfy standards designed to assure that the home will compare favorably with other housing that would be allowed on the site, and not merely because it is a mobile home." The proposed Zoning Ordinance Amendments for Uniform Treatment of Residential Dwellings Located on Individual Lots was developed to assist cities and counties in amending their zoning ordinances to comply with the Georgia Supreme Court ruling. The proposed amendments were developed with input and assistance from GMA legal counsel, ACCG legal counsel, city attorneys, county attorneys, GMA staff and GMHA legal counsel. 
(b)	The R-1 MH district is composed chiefly of existing low-density single-family residential areas of the city and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to permit the continuation of existing mixed residential and manufactured home development together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 8.1) 
Sec. 94-133. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses for the R-1 MH single-family and manufactured home residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Single-family and manufactured home dwellings. 
(2)	Agriculture, excluding the commercial raising of livestock and poultry. 
(3)	Public municipal buildings, structures or land uses. 
(4)	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools, and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 8.2) 
Sec. 94-134. - Special exception uses. 
Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated in this section may be permitted in the R-1 MH single-family and manufactured home residential district. The board may approve or deny such applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for manufactured homes used as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, are as follows: 
1.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. Approval shall be in accordance with section 94-178. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Guidelines for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts; provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home, when used as an accessory structure or dwelling, shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b.1 and (3)b.5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-130, 94-138, 94-142, 94-150 and 94-173 such as: 
1.	Day nurseries or kindergartens. 
2.	Public utility substations, if essential for the provision of service to the development district in which it is proposed to be located. 
3.	Churches. 
4.	Public and private schools. 
5.	Recreational developments including, but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. 
6.	Duplexes. 
7.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 8.3) 
Sec. 94-135. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: 

 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 8.4) 
Sec. 94-136. - R-2 Multifamily residential district. 
It is the intent of the R-2 multifamily residential district to provide for a multifamily type of residential development, allowing higher density development, while maintaining an environment similar to that found in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 9.1) 
Sec. 94-137. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses for the R-2 multifamily residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Any permitted use in the R-1 single-family residential district. 
(2)	Multifamily dwellings. 
(3)	Boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
(4)	Duplexes. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 9.2) 
Sec. 94-138. - Special exception uses. 
Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated in this section may be permitted in the R-2 multifamily residential district. The board may approve or deny such applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for manufactured homes used as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single family, are as follows: 
1.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. Approval shall be in accordance with section 94-178. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Guidelines for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts, provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home, when used as an accessory structure or dwelling, shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b.1 and (3)b.5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-130, 94-134, 94-142, 94-150 and 94-173, such as: 
1.	Day nurseries or kindergartens. 
2.	Churches. 
3.	Public utility substations, if essential for the provision of service to the development district in which it is proposed to be located. 
4.	Public and private schools. 
5.	Recreational developments including, but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. 
6.	Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for a profit. 
7.	Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes. 
8.	Professional offices such as medical, dental, legal, etc. 
9.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 9.3) 
Sec. 94-139. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: 

 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 9.4) 
Sec. 94-140. - C-1 General commercial district. 
The C-1 general commercial district is intended for those commercial uses that provide goods and services that are used by the entire community and the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 10.1) 
Sec. 94-141. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the C-1 general commercial district are as follows: 
(1)	Apartment above a store or shop. 
(2)	Retail sales for neighborhood needs, such as drug stores, small grocery stores, fruit and vegetable stands, gift shops, florists, etc. 
(3)	Eating places, such as coffee shops, restaurants, and take-out establishments. 
(4)	Service establishments, such as barbershops and beauty shops, laundries, day nurseries, banks, etc. 
(5)	Professional offices, such as medical, dental, legal, accounting, etc. 
(6)	Public municipal buildings, structures or land uses. 
(7)	Other uses which are similar or compatible to the permitted uses. 
(8)	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as parking, garages, pools, and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 10.2) 
Sec. 94-142. - Special exception uses. 
Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated in this section may be permitted in the C-1 general commercial district. The board may approve or deny such applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Standards for using manufactured homes as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single family, are as follows: 
1.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. Approval shall be in accordance with section 94-178. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Standards for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts; provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home when used as an accessory structure or dwelling shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b.1 and (3)b.5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-130, 94-134, 94-138, 94-150 and 94-173, such as: 
1.	Public utility substations, if essential for the provision of service to the development district in which it is proposed to be located. 
2.	Churches. 
3.	Public and private schools. 
4.	Recreational developments including, but not limited to private or public lake, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. 
5.	Hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes. 
6.	Clubs and fraternal organizations not operating for profit. 
7.	Automobile sales and storage. 
8.	Bowling alley. 
9.	Bus terminal. 
10.	Commercial recreation. 
11.	Drive-in theater. 
12.	Equipment sales and storage. 
13.	Filling stations and automobile repair shops. 
14.	Hotel, motel and tourist compound. 
15.	Lumberyard or building material sales. 
16.	Manufactured home or travel trailer sales. 
17.	Radio or television broadcasting station. 
18.	Restaurant and coffee shop. 
19.	Supermarket. 
20.	Truckstop. 
21.	Undertaking establishment. 
22.	Other uses which are similar or compatible to the permitted uses. 
23.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 10.3) 
Sec. 94-143. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained below, and in other sections: 

 
In the downtown area, the setback requirements shall be in harmony with the existing buildings and structures as they were as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in November of 1986. This harmonious requirement shall apply to any new construction or rebuilding or remodeling in the future. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 10.4) 
Sec. 94-144. - I-1 General industrial district. 
The I-1 general industrial district is intended to provide areas suitable for activities and uses of an industrial nature which permits most compounding, assembly or treatment of articles or materials, including the manufacturing or processing of raw materials. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 11.1) 
Sec. 94-145. - Permitted uses. 
Within the I-1 general industrial district, the following type of uses are permitted: 
(1)	Any use permitted in the C-1 general commercial district, except that no new residential uses shall be permitted unless accessory to a permitted principal use. 
(2)	Manufacturing, packaging, or processing of raw or semi-finished materials. 
(3)	Warehousing and storage. 
(4)	The sale of goods or products produced or processed on the site. 
(5)	Public municipal buildings, structures or land use. 
(6)	Other uses which are similar or compatible to the permitted uses. 
(7)	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, parking, pools, and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 11.2) 
Sec. 94-146. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: 

 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 11.3) 
Sec. 94-147. - Performance standards. 
Industrial activities shall be in conformance with standards established by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Industrial activities shall emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive dust, fly ash, fumes, vapors, or gases, which can cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation or to other forms of property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission; discharge no smoke of a consistency which will restrict the passage of sunlight beyond the property line; emit any obnoxious odor perceptible beyond the lot boundaries; produce no heat or glare injurious to human beings, animals or vegetation (electromagnetic radiation or radio active emissions shall not be of any intensity that interferes with the use of any other property); discharge of any untreated potentially dangerous effluent from plant operations into local surface or subsurface drainage courses. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 11.4) 
Sec. 94-148. - A-R agricultural-residential district. 
The A-R agricultural-residential district is composed of agriculture where some development has been occurring or is likely to occur. The regulations for the district are designed to encourage a compatible relationship between agriculture and limited residential development while protecting existing agricultural activities. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 12.1) 
Sec. 94-149. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses with the A-R agricultural-residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Single-family dwelling. 
(2)	Agricultural pursuits, including field crop farming, truck gardening, and forestry. 
(3)	Public municipal buildings, structures, or land uses. 
(4)	Other uses which are similar or compatible to the permitted uses. 
(5)	Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted use, such as garages, pools and fences. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 12.2) 
Sec. 94-150. - Special exception uses. 
Upon application to the board of appeals and favorable decision thereon, the uses enumerated in this section may be permitted in the A-R agricultural-residential district. The board may approve or deny such applications as submitted, or may approve the application subject to specified conditions in addition to those described herein. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Standards for using manufactured homes as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single family, are as follows: 
1.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. Approval shall be in accordance with section 94-178. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Guidelines for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts; provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home, when used as an accessory structure or dwelling, shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b.1 and (3)b.5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-130, 94-134, 94-138, 94-142, and 94-173, such as: 
1.	Manufactured home dwellings. 
2.	Day nurseries or kindergartens. 
3.	Public utility substations, if essential for the provision of service to the development district in which it is proposed to be located. 
4.	Churches. 
5.	Public and private schools. 
6.	Recreational developments including, but not limited to, private or public lakes, swimming pools, golf courses or other recreational developments. 
7.	Cemeteries. 
8.	Hospitals, clinics and nursing homes. 
9.	Clubs and fraternal organizations not operating for profit. 
10.	Duplexes. 
11.	Manufactured home parks. 
12.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 12.3) 
Sec. 94-151. - Bulk regulations. 
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the modifications contained in other sections: 

 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 12.4) 
Secs. 94-152—94-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 94-171. - Development officer. 
A development officer designated by the city council shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the development officer shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.1) 
Sec. 94-172. - Development permits required. 
No building, manufactured home or other structure shall be erected, moved, or structurally expanded without a permit. No building permit shall be approved by the development officer except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless he receives a written order from the board of appeals in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance, as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.2) 
Sec. 94-173. - Construction and use to be provided in development plans. 
Development permits issued on the basis of plans and applications reviewed by the development officer authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by this chapter. 
(1)	Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for manufactured homes used as single-family dwellings are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
b.	Compatibility standards. Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single family, are as follows: 
1.	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be compared to site-built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to: 
i.	Site-built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this chapter; 
ii.	Existing development; or 
iii.	Proposed development in the same zoning district or area. 
2.	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
3.	At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 72 inches by 96 inches. 
(2)	Industrialized buildings as single-family dwellings. Guidelines for industrialized buildings used as single-family dwellings are as follows: Industrialized buildings qualifying as dwelling, single-family, shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
(3)	Other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes. Guidelines for other manufactured homes and mobile homes used for residential purposes are as follows: 
a.	Permitted locations. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted within areas designated or utilized agricultural, agricultural-residential, and manufactured home districts; provided that each home complies with the district standards in which it is located and the standards hereinafter set forth. 
b.	Standards for placement. Standards for placement of manufactured homes not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, are as follows: 
1.	A 30-foot setback is required from any other dwelling unit on site. 
2.	The structure must be connected to the water and sewerage system (including well and septic tank, if applicable) approved by the city/county health department. 
3.	In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by the state, the structure must be installed according to the manufacturer's installation instructions when available, or appendix H of the state building code. 
4.	The area beneath each structure must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including, but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the city/county building inspector. 
5.	A manufactured home or mobile home when used as an accessory structure or dwelling shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
6.	The standards set out in subsections (3)b.1 and (3)b.5 of this section are not applicable to and shall not be applied to manufactured homes, other manufactured homes or mobile homes otherwise regulated hereunder when located in a manufactured home rental community or park or mobile home rental community or park. 
c.	Special exceptions. Manufactured homes which do not meet the definition of dwelling, single-family, and mobile homes, shall be permitted as a special exception for residential use in all zoning districts as provided in this section and sections 94-130, 94-134, 94-138, 94-142, and 94-150. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.3) 
Sec. 94-174. - Planning commission; duties. 
A planning commission shall be appointed by the city council in accordance with the laws of the state. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all redistricting applications and amendments to the text of the development standards ordinance and shall submit a written report to the city council on its action. Such report shall recommend approval, denial, or recommend other appropriate alternatives for the city council's consideration. The recommendation of the planning commission is not binding and is subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. of. 3-9-1992, § 13.4) 
Sec. 94-175. - Board of appeals, powers and duties. 
(a)	A board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(b)	The board of appeals shall consist of not less than three or more than five members, appointed by the city council. The members shall serve for overlapping terms of not less than three or more than five years or thereafter until their successors are appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. The appointing authorities shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the board of appeals. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in the municipality or county, except that one member may be also a member of the planning commission. 
(c)	The board of appeals shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board of appeals shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or of the planning commission. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to note, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(d)	Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality or county affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(e)	An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action taken from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(f)	The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(g)	The board of appeals shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this article. 
(2)	To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance or resolution upon which such board is required to pass under such ordinance or resolution. 
(3)	To authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the ordinance or resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance or resolution will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance or resolution shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a.	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
b.	The application of the ordinance or resolution to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance or resolution; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the ordinance or resolution. 
(h)	In exercising the powers referenced in subsection (g) of this section, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit: 
(1)	Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the development officer in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)	Special exceptions, conditions governing applications; procedures. To hear and decide only such special exceptions as the board of appeals is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. A special exception shall not be granted by the board of appeals unless and until: 
a.	A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; 
b.	Notice is given at least 15 days in advance of the public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. Notice of such hearings shall be posted on the property for which special exception is sought, at the city hall, and in one other public place at least 15 days prior to the public hearing; 
c.	The public hearing is held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney; 
d.	The board of appeals makes a finding that is empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest; 
e.	The board makes written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exceptions and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable: 
1.	Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe; 
2.	Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in subsection (h)(2)e.1 of this section and the economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the special exception on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district; 
3.	Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in (h)(2)e.1 and (h)(2)e.2 of this section; 
4.	Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility; 
5.	Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character; 
6.	Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district; 
7.	Required yards and other open space; 
8.	General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district. 
(3)	Variances; conditions governing applicants; procedures. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the board of appeals unless and until: 
a.	A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
1.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same districts; 
2.	That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; 
3.	That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
4.	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, of buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
b.	The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney; 
c.	The board of appeals shall make findings that the requirements of article VII of this chapter have been met by the applicant for a variance; 
d.	The board of appeals shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; 
e.	The board of appeals shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
In granting any variance, the board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made apart of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable under this chapter. Under no circumstances shall the board of appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district. 
(4)	Board has powers of administrative official on appeals; reversing decision of development officer. 
a.	In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board of appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
b.	The concurring vote of a majority of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the development officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. 
(5)	Appeals from the board of appeals. Any person, board, taxpayer, department, or bureau of the city or county aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the state. 
(6)	Relationship of development officer, board of appeals, city, and courts on matters of appeal. 
a.	It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the development officer and that such questions shall be presented to the board of appeals only on appeal from the decision of the development officer, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
b.	It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the city council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this chapter. Under this chapter, the city council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed redistricting and text amendments or the repeal of this chapter, as provided by law, of establishing a schedule of fees and charges, and of appointing members to the planning commission and board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.5) 
Sec. 94-176. - Amendments. 
This chapter, including the districting map, may be amended from time to time by the city council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(1)	Initiation of amendments. Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or proposals to amend the districting map. An application may be initiated by the planning commission or be submitted to the planning commission by the city council or by any person who owns property within the districting jurisdiction of the city. Unless initiated by the city council or the planning commission, all applications for map amendments must be submitted by the owner of such property or the authorized agent of the owner for whom the redistricting is requested. 
(2)	Applications for amendments. Each request for amendment of the districting map shall be submitted on a form provided by the city. A separate request must be filed for each parcel or separate ownership for which a districting amendment is requested. 
(3)	Notice requirements. Before any changes or amendments to this chapter or the districting map, the following must be adhered to: 
a.	Notice by publication. 
1.	Prior to hearing. Notice by publication must occur at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the selected date of the hearing. 
2.	Pertains to. The notice by publication pertains to: 
i.	Adoption of a development standards ordinance; 
ii.	Amendment of a development standards ordinance; 
iii.	Amendment which enacts a redistricting of property from one classification to another (districting map amendment). 
3.	Notice contents. The notice must contain the following information regarding the hearing: 
i.	Time; 
ii.	Place; 
iii.	Purpose. 
4.	Notice contents (instigated by a party other than a local government). The notice of a hearing instigated by a party other than a local government must contain the following information: 
i.	Time; 
ii.	Place; 
iii.	Purpose; 
iv.	Location of property; 
v.	Current districting classification; 
vi.	Proposed districting classification. 
b.	Notice by posting a sign. If notice is given by posting a sign, the sign should contain the following information regarding the hearing: 
1.	Time; 
2.	Place; 
3.	Purpose; 
4.	Location of property 
5.	Current districting classification; 
6.	Proposed districting classification. 
The sign shall be placed on the property to be considered for redistricting not less than 15 days prior to the hearing nor more than 45 days before the hearing. 
(4)	Procedures for the districting hearing. The following are procedures for the districting hearing: 
a.	Policies and procedures shall be set up and be committed to writing and available for distribution to the public; 
b.	A specific time shall be set up for the public hearing; 
c.	An agenda of the items to be heard shall be established and published; 
d.	There shall be limited time of equal duration for the proponents of the development standards legislation and the opponents of the development standards legislation. 
In addition, minutes of the meeting should be maintained and the decision of the city be entered upon the minutes by official approval. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.6) 
Sec. 94-177. - Procedures for approval of manufactured homes classified as dwelling, single-family, other manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
It is the intent of this section to provide procedures for approval of permits for manufactured homes classified as dwelling, single-family, other manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
(1)	Applications for approval of placement of manufactured homes or mobile homes shall be made on a form developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the board of appeals for review and approval in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)	Such applications shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this chapter as applicable to each such structure and, as applicable, conformity with the standards herein, including photographs or renderings of the front and side of the manufactured home or mobile home, exterior finish, and other information necessary to make determinations required by this chapter. 
(3)	Approval or denial of the application shall be within 45 days of receipt of the application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application within five working days after such decision is made. Conditional approval shall require that the conditions and reasons therefor be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. 
(4)	The board of appeals may approve deviations from the definitional or compatibility standards or architectural standards set forth in section 94-173 on the basis of a finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling unit will be compatible and harmonious to or superior to existing structures in the vicinity. 
(5)	Appeals of the decision of the board of appeals in interpretations, conditional grants, or denial of permits shall be made to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be based on the purpose and intent of the ordinance; provided that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public welfare and safety be secured, and substantial justice done. 
(6)	Appellate procedure to be utilized is set out in section 94-178. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 13.7) 
Sec. 94-178. - Procedure for appeal of denial or conditional approval of manufactured homes classified as dwelling, single-family, other manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
(a)	Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official or other officer, department, board or bureau charged with the approval, conditional approval or denial of the placement of manufactured homes classified as dwelling, single-family, other manufactured homes and mobile homes, may appeal from such decision to the city council by filing with the clerk of said body, if one exists, or if not, by filing directly with each member of said body, a petition, in writing, setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein the decision appealed from is contrary to the provisions of this chapter or the laws of this state. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the date on which the decision is rendered. The date on which the decision is rendered shall be the date on which that decision is reduced to writing as required in this chapter. 
(b)	An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless such stay would cause imminent period to life and/or property. In such case, proceedings may be stayed by an order from the city council or upon order from a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(c)	The city council shall fix the date and time certain for the hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof to the appealing party and the building official or other official making the appeal's decision. Upon the hearing, any party to the appeal may appear in person or by agent or through an attorney. 
(d)	The city council shall decide the appeal within two working days after the date and time of the hearing. The appeal shall be sustained upon an express finding that the action of the building official or other official whose action has been appealed was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its power, the board may reverse or affirm the decision appealed, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or determination appealed from and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal was taken. 
(e)	The city council shall consider only those matters asserted in the notice of appeal and shall consider only the record of the proceedings and matters presented to the official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(f)	Any decision from the city council may be appealed by filing an appeal with the superior court of this county within 30 days after the date of the decision on appeal has been rendered in writing. The decision made by the city council shall be placed in writing and the factual basis for the decision shall be set forth in the written decision. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, §§ G 1-6) 
Secs. 94-179—94-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 94-210. - Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 14.1) 
Sec. 94-211. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 14.2) 
Sec. 94-212. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-10, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)	The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 3-9-1992, § 14.3) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia law. 

 