THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BALL GROUND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
A. R. (Rick) Roberts, III, Mayor 
Andrenia Stoner, Councilmember—Post #1 
Lee Prettyman, Councilmember—Post #2 
Frank Homiller, Councilmember—Post #3, Mayor Pro-tem 
John Byrd, Councilmember—Post #4 
Mickey O'Malley, Councilmember—Post #5 
City Council 
____________ Eric W. Wilmarth 
City Manager 
____________ 
Darrell Caudill 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen L. Jordan 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2010 Code, and ordinances adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2010 Code and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Karen L. Jordan, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. 2016. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BALL GROUND, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE  [Ord. of 9-8-16] 
The Council of the City of Ball Ground hereby ordains: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 113, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 28, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for one year, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided: (i) respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense, and (ii) with respect to violations of the Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intent to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 28, 2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective   September 8, 2016   . 
1st Reading   August 11, 2016        /s/ _____ 
2nd Reading   September 8, 2016     /s/ _____ 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification required, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions . All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the city Charter. 
City council, council . The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. 
City, municipality . The term "city" or "municipality" means the City of Ball Ground, Georgia. 
Classification. Subpart B of this Code is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development. Subpart A of this Code is a codification of other ordinances. Failure to include an ordinance in subpart B that relates to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. Inclusion of an ordinance in subpart B that does not pertain to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. Inclusion of an ordinance in subpart A that pertains to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having that privilege or duty, shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge such duty. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority . Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular includes the plural. The plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A., state act. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. Any reference to a "state act," whether by short title, year and page or year and act number, is to such act as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" is to be construed to mean seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, nor an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusions herein. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section, chapter, article, division, subdivision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered (insert number), that reads as follows: …." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other portions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other portions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the mayor and council which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for one year, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2010, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges not inconsistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, or providing retirement, disability or death benefits for officials, officers or employees of the city or providing personnel policies; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance and any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(14)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(15)  All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - Compensation; expenses. 
The mayor shall be compensated at the rate of $300.00 per month and each councilmember shall be compensated at the rate of $25.00 per meeting, with a maximum of $50.00 per month. The mayor and council shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the exercise of official duties. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-1) 
Secs. 2-20—2-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-42. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the second Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-11) 
Sec. 2-43. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transactions or business during a meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-44. - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-15) 
Sec. 2-45. - Motions having precedence. 
When a question is under consideration no motion shall be received except as follows to: 
(1)  Lay on the table; 
(2)  Postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  Postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  Refer to a committee; 
(5)  Amend; 
(6)  Strike out or insert; or 
(7)  Divide. 
Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-16) 
Sec. 2-46. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 2010, § 2-1-17) 
Secs. 2-47—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - City clerk; duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(2)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(3)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2010, § 2-4-1) 
State Law reference— Municipal clerk training, O.C.G.A. § 36-45-20. 
Sec. 2-67. - City attorney; duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and render any other legal services as may he required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2010, § 2-4-2) 
Secs. 2-68—2-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-93. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies, which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission, which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-3; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-94. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this division is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-11; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-95. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-1; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-96. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This division shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-2; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-97. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for him or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(f)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(g)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(h)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(i)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(j)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(k)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(l)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(m)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(n)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(o)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(p)  A city official shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(q)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(r)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(s)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge on any matter pending before the municipal court. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-4; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-98. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-5; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-99. - Board of ethics. 
The municipal court shall hear and render decisions on all proper verified complaints filed under this division. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-6; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-100. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the clerk of the municipal court. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court clerk shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this division. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The municipal court is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The municipal court is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the municipal court shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-7; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-101. - Service of complaint. 
The municipal court clerk as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The municipal court shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-9; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 2-102. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the county superior court within 30 days after the decision of the municipal court. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Code 2010, § 2-8-10; Ord. of 12-12-2011, § 1) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for governmental service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; conflicts of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-10 et seq. 
Secs. 2-103—2-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-133. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-1) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1. 
Sec. 2-134. - Purchasing. 
The finance director shall be the purchasing agent of the city, and shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; and 
(2)  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by the city. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-3) 
Secs. 2-135—2-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-152—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 2-171. - Established. 
There is hereby established a tree board for the city to develop and administer a comprehensive community tree management program for the care of trees located on public property within the city. 
(Code 2010, § 2-6-1) 
Sec. 2-172. - Membership. 
The board shall be composed of five members. Three members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The acting president of the Ball Ground Garden Club and the mayor of the city shall be standing members of the tree board. 
(Code 2010, § 2-6-2) 
Sec. 2-173. - Meeting and policy. 
The board shall meet at times convenient to its members, but in no event shall the board meet less than once a quarter. At such meeting, the board will formulate annually a comprehensive plan for the conservation of trees located within the city. Said plan shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for their approval prior to implementation. 
(Code 2010, § 2-6-3) 
Secs. 2-174—2-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-194. - Declaration of need for downtown development authority. 
The mayor and city council declare that there is a need for a downtown development authority to be activated in the city in order to further the essential public purposes of revitalizing and redeveloping its central business district by creating a climate favorable to both the location of new industry, trade, and commerce and to the development of existing industry, trade, and commerce by financing projects under the act that will develop and promote trade, industry, commerce, and employment opportunities and by exercising its powers under the act to aide the accomplishment of the aforesaid public welfare objectives of the act. 
(Code 2010, § 6-7-1) 
Sec. 2-195. - District defined. 
After careful consideration of the economic needs of the city, and of its citizens, and after careful assessment of special developmental needs of the city due to the relatively small area encompassed by its boundaries, and finally out of a desire to promote the revitalization and prosperity of the city so that the city may continue to be a center of industry, trade, and commerce within the state, the city council having used its discretion and reasonable judgment as authorized by the act hereby declares that said authority hereby created shall have authority to act within the geographical area within the city limits described as follows: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city and being more particularly described on the map attached hereto, incorporated herein as exhibit "A". 
(Code 2010, § 6-7-2) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DEALERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
Unless the context or the specific provisions of this section demand otherwise, the words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same definitions and meanings as state law where used in O.C.G.A. title 3. 
Administrator means the city manager or his designee. 
Agent means an individual who does not have an ownership interest in the licensed premises but is employed in a managing capacity and designated by the owner of the licensed premises to be licensee. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Applicant means the person making application for a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages and, if applicable, any individual designated by that person to be licensee. 
Business area means any area suitable for the location of businesses as permitted by the city zoning ordinance. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, that has been exempted as nonprofit under section 509A of the Internal Revenue Code, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items, which may sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond charged with a crime, or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed as a licensee by this chapter. 
Craft beer means a beer made in a traditional or non-mechanized way by a small, independent and traditional brewery producing less than six million barrels of beer annually. Less than 25 percent of the craft brewery is owned or controlled (or equivalent economic interest) by an alcohol industry member that is not itself a craft brewer. 
Distance means the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of the proposed premises of licensee to the nearest property line of any church, school, college, public housing, or alcohol treatment center, as defined herein. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any licensee to the nearest property line of any church, school, college, public housing, or alcohol treatment facility. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Food caterer means any person whose primary business is the preparation of food for consumption off the premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
License means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or consumption on the premises. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air-conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 20. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer" and "malt beverage" are interchangeable throughout this chapter. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operation, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the licensee. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means a person less than 18 years of age. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Permit holder means that person authorized with a work permit and designated by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises. 
Person means any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. In the case of a partnership, it includes all partners. In the case of a corporation, it includes all principal shareholders. 
Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means a nonprofit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter, having at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholders or members, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guest beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
Public park means any public lands owned or controlled and operated by this city, and county of this state, any municipality of the state, the state, the United States of America or any property owned or managed by a nonprofit organization, in and upon which facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction there-from whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any spirituous liquor by the drink. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 20 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. At least two meals per day shall be served at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating; and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted and food and nonalcoholic beverage sales must be equal to or more than 60 percent of total sales. The serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises shall only be incidental thereto. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. The term "retail sale" also includes, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the state pre-kindergarten program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Underage person means any person below the age of 21, the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the state. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-2; Ord. of 4-9-2009; Ord. of 8-10-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-12. 
Sec. 4-20. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving certain areas through reasonable considerations; 
(4)  Giving effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(5)  Protecting against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one area or ownership; 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-1; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-21. - Growlers. 
(a)  The sale of growlers in compliance with this article is authorized for establishments defined in subsection 4-19 authorized to sell alcoholic beverages excluding distilled spirits, by the package. The filling of growlers by means of a capped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this article. The term "growler" means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a screw cap or flip top and then sealed for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the bottle does not exceed 64 ounces and is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with beer from a keg. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Except as hereinafter provided, consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be eligible for an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of growler malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. Growler malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler and malt beverage appreciation and education. Growler malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. Growler malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed four ounces, and no customer shall consume more than 16 ounces in any two-hour period. Only the licensee or an employee shall open and handle unpackaged malt beverages, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. No open growler container shall be removed from the licensed premises. Not more than two times per week for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted within the designated interior portion of the premises. The annual fee for an annual growler malt beverage tasting license shall be $50.00, and may be revised, by resolution of the mayor and council from time to time and published in the municipal schedule of fees. 
(c)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirit license, who is authorized to sell growlers and whose premises are located in the downtown district shall, in conjunction with city-sponsored special events within the downtown district, be authorized to sell malt beverages in 16-ounce plastic containers in the same manner as consumption on the premises licensees in the downtown district, except that such sales shall only take place outside the premises in a tent directly adjacent to the premises. The exact location and set-up of the tent shall be subject to the review of the chief of police, or designee, for public safety compliance. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 4-22. - Brew pubs—Exception for brew pubs. 
(a)  For all purposes of this section, a "brew pub" is defined as an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception from section 4-88 shall exist for owners and operators of brew pubs provided that: 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the council pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in section 4-47, and each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements; and 
(2)  A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to: (i) manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 5,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form; and (ii) operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only; and, provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers. 
(c)  Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(d)  A brew pub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by package for consumption off the premises. 
(e)  A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
(f)  Except as set forth above in this section, a brew pub license holder shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 4-23. - Special events—Special temporary outside events. 
(a)  Establishments duly licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises must submit an application and site plan to the director of public safety or designee to engage in outside special events. A special event temporary permit shall authorize the retail consumption licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed the hours otherwise specified in this chapter. The applicant must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The licensed establishment must have an existing license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The entrances and exits to the event must be through controlled entry points which allow for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event. 
(2)  A site plan must be submitted to and approved by the chief of police as well as the city manager for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than 25 persons, a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the chief of police for approval. The building inspector must approve any temporary structures. 
(3)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the chief of police authorizing the use of the property for the event. 
(4)  The outside event shall not exceed two days. 
(5)  All outside events for an individual licensed establishment will be restricted to two events per year. 
(6)  A non-refundable fee of $150.00 per event must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(7)  The completed application must be submitted to the chief of police no less than 45 days prior to the scheduled event. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or appeal any other requirements ordained under this Code. 
(b)  The licensee or the licensee's employee shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages to consumers. The licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this article and state law, and liable for infractions thereof. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 4-24. - Breweries. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Brewery means a place where malt beverages are manufactured or brewed. 
(b)  Brewer license authorized. Brewer's licenses are authorized in the city; provided, however, that no individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewery without first obtaining a proper brewer's license from the city in the manner provided in this chapter, and each holder of a brewer's license shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable state statutes, including rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. 
(c)  License fee. The license fee for a brewer shall be as set in the schedule of fees for the City of Ball Ground. 
(d)  Tastings and tours. Tastings and tours shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-38, as amended from time to time. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Secs. 4-25—4-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND SPECIAL PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 4-44. - License is a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the governing authority upon the terms and conditions provided in this division. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may be manufactured, subject to state and federal regulations, in the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided in this division. A license to manufacture malt beverages, distilled spirits, or wine must be obtained from the city council pursuant to the same procedure set forth in sections 4-48 through 4-55. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage if the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale the alcoholic beverages or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(d)  All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this division and state law. 
(e)  All licenses granted pursuant to this division shall have printed on the front these words: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled and is subject to the terms of the Ball Ground Alcohol Ordinance, as the same may be amended from time to time." 
(f)  Any holder of a license issued in accord with this division is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-3; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Licensing generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-49 et seq., 3-4-110, 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-60. 
Sec. 4-45. - Licenses generally. 
All licenses issued under this division shall: 
(1)  Permit the licensees to sell, distribute, or manufacture the beverage or beverages for which the license is issued inside the corporate limits of the city, pursuant to the terms of this division and consistent with the laws of the state and the United States; 
(2)  Not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without prior approval from the city council upon written application from the licensee; 
(3)  Permit the licensee to sell malt beverages, wines, distilled spirits, or any combination thereof, depending upon the license issued, for consumption on the premises where sold; and 
(4)  Permit the licensee to sell malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits, or any combination thereof, depending upon the license issued, for retail package sales. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-4; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-46. - Licenses, permits, and fees. 
(a)  License, permit and administrative fees applicable to this division are set out as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages, distilled spirits and wine to be served by the drink for consumption only on the premises: $1,500.00 per year; 
(2)  Retail package of distilled spirits: $2,000.00 per year; 
(3)  Retail package of malt beverage and wine: $1,500.00 per year; 
(4)  Malt beverage and wine catering off-premises: $2,000.00 per year; 
(5)  Catering event permit fee (if caterer is domiciled): $25.00 per event; 
(6)  Catering event permit fee (if caterer is non-domiciled): $50.00 per event; 
(7)  Transfer fee: one-half of the annual license fee for the license to be transferred; 
(8)  Employee pouring-permit fee: $30.00 per year; 
(9)  Application fee: $300.00. 
(b)  Each applicant for a license shall pay an application fee to the city according to its published schedule of fees. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-5; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— License fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-4-110, 3-5-43, 
Sec. 4-47. - Fee payment. 
(a)  Before a license or permit shall be granted, the applicant therefore shall comply with all provisions of this division and each applicant shall pay the license, permit or administrative and investigatory fees in accordance with this division. 
(b)  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by the full amount of the license fee, together with the administrative fee. All fees are payable by check or cash. Any check returned as insufficient funds will result in the suspension or revocation of the license. The decision of whether to revoke or suspend shall be at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Any applicant for a license under this division who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this division shall pay no administrative fee. However, such an applicant shall still be subject to investigation procedures pursuant to this section 4-47 and section 4-55. 
(d)  If the application is denied, the funds submitted, less the administrative fee will be refunded. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the administrative fee shall be retained. Once a license has issued, however, no portion of the application fees shall be refunded if the license is revoked, suspended, transferred or surrendered. 
(e)  Any license application made pursuant to this division may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, the funds submitted, less the administrative fee will be refunded. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-6; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-48. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residential address of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the names and address of the registered agent for service of process; the name of the manager; and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity that owns or operates the establishment for which a license is sought. If the applicant's manager changes, the applicant must act pursuant to the procedures outlined in section 4-56. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the application form to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. The failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  The fingerprints provided shall be forwarded to the police department and/or the state bureau of investigation, or the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to search for any instance of criminal activity during the ten years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this division, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  The city council or its designee shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this division. Such written notification shall set forth the general charge forming the basis for denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-7; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Fingerprints, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c). 
Sec. 4-49. - Advertising intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for license under this division shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least one time per week for four consecutive weeks in the daily paper published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and date and time the mayor and city council will hear the application. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column advertisement. 
(b)  The running of the advertisement required in this section in a newspaper may be concurrent with the time after the application for license is filed, and if one day's advertisement in two weeks is not made before the filing of the application, the application shall state that the advertisement is being made. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: " ____________ license applied for. A hearing before the mayor and city council of the city shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , whichever is applicable. All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible to persons using such public areas. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-9; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Notice of intent to apply retail distilled spirits dealer's license, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-27. 
Sec. 4-50. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued unless covered by an off-premises license and an event permit as set forth in this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-10; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-51. - Qualifications of licensee. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. The applicant must not be less than 25 years of age; and must be a resident of the state for not less than six consecutive months before filing the application, unless the applicant specifically designates a resident of the city or county who has resided within the city or county for at least six months before filing the application, which resident shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(b)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless proper information establishes to the satisfaction of the city council or its designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and have been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually-related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, has been so convicted in the ten years preceding the filing of the application. An applicant's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. If any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, then the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled. 
(c)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this division to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within five years prior to the filing of the application. 
(f)  The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(g)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the city or county a resident agent as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city manager and shall be in such form as the city council may prescribe. 
(h)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license if the applicant lacks adequate participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or if the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. Each person signing an application for a license under this division must file concurrently with the application a sworn affirmation as to his interest and/or involvement with the entity seeking the license. 
(i)  In addition to other application and licensing provisions as set forth in this division, it is the policy of the city that any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and be issued to, an owner who is a full-time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the owner and an agent who is a full-time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the city owned by the owner. 
(1)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the sole proprietor if the sole proprietor is a full-time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the sole proprietor and an agent who is a full-time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the city owned by the sole proprietor. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the partnership together with either a majority partner who is a full-time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to a majority partner and an agent who is a full-time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the city owned by the partnership. 
(3)  Where the applicant is a corporation, whether publicly traded or privately held, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the corporation together with an agent who is a full-time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the city owned by the corporation. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-11; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-52. - Location of business; districts where permitted. 
No license to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form, or by the drink shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business except within areas as permitted by the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-12; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-53. - Distance of business from residence. 
No license under this division shall be issued to any location which is within a 150-foot radius of a property line of a private residence without the permission of the owner thereof; provided, however, that if the city council at a public hearing shall determine that the property value of said residence will not be affected, that the quiet enjoyment of the premises by the residents thereof shall not be adversely effected and the grant of such license will have no other adverse effect on the residents. The council may waive this provision of this section. This section shall not apply to residences located within commercial zones. This section shall not apply to renewal of existing license or to transfer from one licensee to another at an existing location. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-13; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-54. - Distance of business from schools, churches, etc. 
No license shall be issued under this division where the place of business of the applicant is located within a radius distance of 300 feet of any church or within 300 feet of any school ground, public library, alcohol treatment facility, or college campus. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-14; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-55. - License issuance. 
(a)  If the applicant is an individual and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the individual's name. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the name of a partner who is a resident of the state or in the name of the state resident who was designated as the agent pursuant to section 4-51 for matters relating to the license and the name of the partnership, jointly. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation or a nonprofit and the license is granted, then the license shall be issued in the name of the shareholder or member who is a resident of the state or in the name of the state resident who was designated, pursuant to section 4-51 and the name of the corporation jointly. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-15; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-56. - Transferability of license; change in ownership. 
(a)  Individuals. In the event of a change of ownership of a business for which an individual has been issued a license, the new owner, if desiring a license, must meet the qualifications, file an application, and tender with the application all the administrative and investigatory fees as provided in this division as well as any license fee that may be due. 
(b)  Partnerships or corporations. In the event of a change of any ownership interest in a business that is owned or operated by a partnership or corporation and for which a license has been issued, the licensee shall report such change to the city council in writing within five days. "Change of ownership interest" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, any change in: 
(1)  Division of profits and/or losses; 
(2)  Division of net sales or gross sales; 
(3)  Members of a partnership or LLC; 
(4)  Stockholders of corporate stock; and 
(5)  Senior management. 
(c)  Revocation of license. If, as a result of any change of ownership interest, the licensee would not qualify under other provisions of this division for the issuance of a license, then the license issued to the licensee shall be subject to revocation and shall not be subject to renewal. 
(d)  Transfer of license. Each application for transfer of a license shall have attached thereto a completed copy of the notice of change of interest required by the state revenue commissioner. After receipt of such application, the city council shall notify the applicant within 30 days of any objection to the transfer. The license shall remain in effect pending approval or disapproval of the transfer. If the transfer is approved, the city council shall permit the license to be transferred upon payment of a transfer fee established in this division. All applications for transfer of a license shall be accompanied by the aforesaid transfer fee, together with an administrative and investigatory fee as provided in this division. If the transfer is not approved, then the transfer fee will be refunded, but the administrative and investigatory fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  No transfer shall be permitted without the approval of the city council. 
(2)  The chief of police shall investigate the transferee's application pursuant to the procedures deemed necessary in sections 4-48 and 4-51. 
(e)  Death of a licensee. Upon the death of a licensee, the executor or administrator of the licensee's estate, upon written notice to the city notifying the city of the licensee's death, may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the calendar year without payment of any additional fee or may delegate the operation of the business to another person if the person operating under the license, whether the executor, administrator, or delegate, would otherwise be qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-16; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-57. - Display of license and alcohol ordinance at place of business. 
(a)  The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(b)  Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this division shall keep a copy of this division upon the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this division; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this division. The licensee shall in all respects be the responsible party for violations of this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-1; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Display of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-4. 
Sec. 4-58. - Expiration/renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew the license shall file applications, with the requisite license fee, with the city manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, the administrative fee will be assessed. 
(b)  Any licensee must annually meet the requirements set forth by the city council in order to obtain a renewal of any license. Any licensee making proper application with supporting documents for a renewal license to operate during the following calendar year, and having filed such application before November 30, shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval is not granted before January 1. 
(c)  All licenses granted under this division shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year, except for applications for a temporary special event license which shall not be halved. 
(d)  Any person renewing any license issued under this division who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to the annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate of one percent (12 percent A.P.R.). 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-18; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-59. - Time limit on opening business; continuity of business; automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  Time limit on opening business; continuity of business. 
(1)  All licensees under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the administrator at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(2)  Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. 
(b)  Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. A license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actually engaged in the business of sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with the specific terms or conditions for which the granting of the license was approved. Any holder of any license under this division who shall for a period of 30 days after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall, after the 30-day period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action, and shall not be entitled to a refund of any monies paid or deposited under this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-19; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-60. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension of a license issued under this division for such period of time as the city council shall, in its sole discretion, determine appropriate: 
(1)  A violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, or any provision of this division or the regulations promulgated under its authority; 
(2)  The failure of the licensee and employees or agents of the licensee to promptly report to the police department any violation of law/breach of peace, disturbance or altercation occurring on or at the licensee's premises; 
(3)  The violation of any law, regulation or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines, by any employee or agent of the licensee in connection with the operation of the business of the licensee; 
(4)  Operation of the business of the licensee in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, or in a manner contrary to public welfare, health or morals; 
(5)  Failure to furnish the city council on request any information or records that would be necessary or needed for use in determining the licensee's compliance and qualifications under this division; 
(6)  Selling alcoholic beverages to a underage person; or 
(7)  Selling alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated or incapacitated condition. 
(b)  Wherever this division permits the city council to suspend any license issued under this division but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised under the guidelines of this subsection (b). 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license; however, said suspension and the basis therefor may be considered in any request for a renewal of said license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any suspension as set out in subsection (a) of this section: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this division and those set by the city council. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances, remedial, or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-20; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-61. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The city council may revoke any license issued under this division, or refuse to issue the same, if the licensee or applicant for renewal: 
(1)  Is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Makes any false statement of a material fact on the application for license or renewal thereof, or on any document required to be filed with the city council; 
(3)  Fails to timely give written notice of any change of ownership interest as required in this division; 
(4)  Violates any rules or regulations promulgated by the mayor and members of city council under this division, of which the licensee has reasonable notice; or 
(5)  Becomes disqualified under this division to hold a license. 
(b)  The city council may revoke the license for any reason specified by section 4-60. 
(c)  The city council shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(d)  The city council shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(e)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this division no longer maintains adequate responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, the city council may revoke the license. 
(f)  With the consent of the city council, the chief of police may immediately revoke any license issued under this division for the violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wines by any licensee or by the agent or employee of any licensee. However, any revocation is not final until a licensee is afforded the opportunity of a hearing before the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-21; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-62. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing, other than in an emergency situation as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The city council or its designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of its intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall be hand delivered or sent certified mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application, and the applicant shall be directed to show cause, if any there be, why the proposed action should not be taken by the city council. The notice shall: 
(1)  Advise of the time and place specified for the hearing, which hearing shall be held in not less than ten days, but not more than 30 days from the date of the service of the notice; 
(2)  Set forth in reasonable detail the grounds for such action and the factual basis supporting those grounds; 
(3)  Advise the applicant or licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses or arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing; and 
(4)  Be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(c)  In the event that an emergency situation is presented where there is a danger to human life, imminent criminal activity or other imminent danger to the peace, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council may immediately suspend or revoke a license so long as a hearing thereon as specified in subsection (b) of this section is held within 30 days of the emergency situation or revocation. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-22; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-63. - Audits of licensees. 
(a)  If the city council or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, it shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license issued under this division. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing beer, wine, distilled spirits and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to retail package beer, wine and distilled spirits licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all form 1099s. 
(c)  The city council may waive all or some of the requirements of the foregoing sentence if it finds that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-23; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-64. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this division during the hours in which the premises are open for business without a warrant or prior notice. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this division and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-24; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-65. - Ancillary wine tasting license—Conditions of license issuance. 
(a)  The holder of a wine-only package store license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to one consecutive two-hour period in any one day. Samples shall not exceed two ounces or less, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(f)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Not more than one time per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be $50.00, which fee may be revised from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Secs. 4-66—4-86. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Special Permits 

Sec. 4-87. - Manufacturing permits. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured in the city except under a valid manufacturing license pursuant to this division and then only for specified beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-39; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-88. - Distribution permits. 
No business shall be permitted to distribute alcohol as a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages in the city except when possessing a valid distribution license pursuant to this division. A distribution license shall be specific to the type of beverage being distributed. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-40; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-89. - Food caterer permits. 
(a)  In order to distribute or sell malt beverages or wine at an authorized catered function, a food caterer shall be required to: 
(1)  Obtain a valid pouring license for the location of the food caterer's business, known as the alcoholic beverage caterer's license; 
(2)  Apply to the city for an event permit providing the name of the caterer, the date, the caterer's address, the time of the event and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
(3)  Pay an event fee as stipulated in section 4-46; 
(4)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(b)  The event permit is valid for the length and duration of the authorized event and shall expire at the end of the event. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person less than 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. It is unlawful for any food caterer to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained an event permit as herein provided. The event permit as contemplated herein shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the mayor and city council; with the exception that closed functions shall not be included. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-41; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-90. - Manager permits. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this division for the retail package sale of distilled spirits, and sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall employ one or more persons as manager for the licensed establishment. At least one manager shall be at the licensee's premises during all times alcoholic beverages are being consumed thereon, and such manager shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. Each such manager shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section, and this permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Each person wishing to obtain a manager's permit must make application on a form provided by the police department within three days of the date of employment. Upon receiving the completed application, the police department shall arrange to have the applicant photographed and fingerprinted and to place these records on file in the police department. 
(c)  Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages or sale or possession of illegal drugs in the past five years shall be ineligible to receive a manager's permit. 
(e)  At least one manager of the licensee shall be a resident of the county. 
(f)  If any manager of the licensee shall cease to be an employee of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident of the county or ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the licensee shall notify the city manager of such event and shall name a new manager within three days after such event occurs. Such new manager shall meet all the requirements of this Code for managers. The city shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's manager; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the city and name a new manager within the three-day period, the city shall charge a fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's manager and/or revoke the licensee's license. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-42; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Secs. 4-91—4-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 4-109. - Establishment can be temporarily closed by chief of police in cases of emergency. 
The chief of police or his designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this division in case of emergency for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-25; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-110. - Specifications of premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the building in which the business will be located. 
(b)  No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall operate under said license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street. 
(c)  No screen, blind, partition, or article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Said stores shall be lighted so that the interior of the store is visible day or night. 
(d)  Licensees shall abide by all state, county, and city laws regulating the use of signs on the exterior of the subject premises. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-27; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-111. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Retail licensees for the sale of malt beverages or wine shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday . The hours of operation of wholesalers for the distribution of malt beverages or wine shall be between the hours of sunup and sundown. 
(b)  Licensees for the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight on Sunday. Licensees shall not allow members of the public to remain on the premises for more than one hour beyond the prohibited hours of sale. 
(c)  Licensees shall not engage in the package sale of distilled spirits except from the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday and from 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-28; Ord. of 4-9-2009; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Secs. 4-112—4-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-136. - Permit holders of licensees; fingerprinting, investigation, reports. 
(a)  For whom required. The following persons shall be required to apply for and obtain a valid pouring permit from the city: 
(1)  All employees and independent contractors who sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages at a premises licensed under this article. 
(2)  Any person acting in a managerial and/or security capacity at the licensed premises, regardless of whether such person sells and/or serves alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Exemption. The licensee to whom an alcoholic beverage license has been issued under this article is not required to obtain a pouring permit. 
(c)  Application and issuance. Subject to the time limit to make application for a pouring permit as provided herein, no person requiring a pouring permit may be employed by an establishment holding a license under this article until such person has been issued a pouring permit from the police department indicating the person is eligible for employment. All applications required by this section shall be investigated by the police department to include, among other things, fingerprinting, an investigation of the criminal record, if any, of the applicant. Any applicant who is not issued a pouring permit shall have the right to appeal such decision within ten days to the city council. 
(d)  Time limit. All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall, within 48 hours after the date of their first day of employment in an establishment holding a license for alcoholic beverages, report to the police department for purposes of being fingerprinted and make application for a pouring permit. 
(e)  Investigation and report. The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted under this section. If there is a record of a violation of this division, the chief of police shall issue a letter to the person fingerprinted, and a copy to the mayor and city council, stating that the person is ineligible for a pouring permit. If it should be found there is a violation of this division of the person fingerprinted, the chief of police shall refer the matter to the mayor and city council for action and shall notify the employer that such person is not eligible for a pouring permit. When the mayor and city council have heard the matter at the next regularly scheduled meeting, they may issue a letter declaring such person to be eligible for a pouring permit if, in the discretion of the mayor and city council, the record would not disqualify such person. 
(f)  Letter of eligibility; term; fee. Any pouring permit issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date of issue unless earlier suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council. The police department may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility for continued employment without the necessity of the employee being again fingerprinted. The police department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for a pouring permit. 
(g)  List of employees to be filed. It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the chief of police or his designee the names of all persons holding a pouring permit, with their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. Changes in the list of persons holding a pouring permit, including the names of new persons requiring or holding a pouring permit, must be filed with the chief of police or his designee within three days from the date of any such changes. 
(h)  Possession of permits by employees. Permit holders shall at all times during their working hours have the permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(i)  Permit holder on premises. At all times that the business is open the licensee shall have at least one permit holder on the premises. 
(j)  Grounds for suspension, revocation, probation. No pouring permit which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued under this section shall be suspended, revoked or placed on probation except for due cause as defined in this subsection (j), and after a hearing and upon written notice to the permit holder of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the city council may deem the circumstances to justify. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of the permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages or the violation of any state, federal or local ordinances set out in this division; or for the omission or falsification of any material in any application; or for any reason which would authorize the refusal of the issuance of a permit; or any violation of this division. The chief of police shall maintain the authority to immediately suspend or revoke any pouring permit issued pursuant to this division prior to a hearing. However, such a suspension or revocation of any pouring permits shall not be finalized until the permit holder is afforded the opportunity of a hearing. All hearings shall be before the city council at a specially called meeting and shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 4-62. After the hearing, if the city council determines due cause exists, the city council may suspend, revoke or place on probation for a maximum of 12 months, with or without conditions, the permit. Should the mayor and city council place the matter down for hearing, the mayor and council, after such hearing, may reverse or modify the decision of the city council, suspend or revoke the pouring permit or place the permit holder on probation with or without conditions. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-26; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-137. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-30; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-138. - Establishments where permitted. 
No alcoholic beverage may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  Eating establishments; 
(2)  Indoor commercial recreation establishments; 
(3)  Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural centers capable of serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen; prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. When eating establishments are located in hotels, motels, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure; 
(4)  Golf clubs owned by a golf club association or golf club corporation, or a public golf course operated by a county or municipality where the selling or the serving of alcoholic beverages is to take place on the golf course premises and the sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises; 
(5)  Publicly or privately owned establishments that are the site of an authorized catered event properly permitted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-31; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-139. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees; pouring licenses. 
Poured alcoholic beverages shall be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by employees with a valid pouring permit. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-32; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-140. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this article without written consent from parent or guardian. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-33; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-141. - Alcohol awareness training. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to provide all new employees at the time of their employment, and all employees annually, with an orientation and training on the alcoholic beverage ordinance; provided that, the failure of the employer to provide such orientation and training or of the employees to participate shall not be a defense for an employee who does not follow the provisions of the alcoholic beverage ordinance; and provided that, a licensee shall keep a record of such orientation and training, which shall be subject to inspection. 
(b)  The failure of the licensee to comply with this subsection regarding the attendance of a policy workshop and the training of permit holders shall be grounds for due cause to suspend and/or revoke the license to sell alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-34; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-142. - Patio sales, sidewalk cafe and outdoor special events. 
(a)  The consumption and/or sale of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in open areas, sidewalks, decks, patios or similar unenclosed spaces on or about the premises of an establishment licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises if written application is made to and approved by city manager, or designee, under such conditions as the director may deem appropriate for the protection of public health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to, maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(b)  The requirement for approval for a patio/open area is that the area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. 
(1)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet above the patio floor, but the structure does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department. 
(2)  The only exit from this area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through a fire exit that complies with the fire code of the city. 
(3)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved by the planning director or its designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(c)  Approval for a sidewalk cafe must be approved by the building inspector. The area in which a sidewalk cafe is operated shall abut the outside front wall of the restaurant of which it is an extension and shall not extend parallel in either direction beyond the outside front wall of the restaurant. The area permitted for a patio/open area shall not extend more than ten feet perpendicular from the outside wall of the restaurant; however, a minimum of three feet shall be provided at all times for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk between the sidewalk cafe area and the curb or nearest obstacle. 
(d)  Divider required. The area permitted for a patio/open area shall be separated from the remaining sidewalk area by a system of connected metal rails and posts that would serve to contain crowds and maintain the boundaries of the cafe. The system shall be designed and constructed such that it resists movement and can be disassembled and removed if necessary. The design must be included in the application and must be approved by the manager prior to issuance of a permit. Such divider shall not be less than three feet nor more than four feet in height. All tables and chairs shall be located totally within the limits of the divider. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the divider in its exact/approved location at all times. 
(e)  The requirement for approval for an outdoor special event is that the area in which alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed must be roped off or enclosed by some structure or fencing providing for public ingress/egress only through designated entrances and exits. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(1)  The special event must receive approval from the city manager. 
(2)  The location at which the outdoor special event is to take place must be properly zoned and approved by the city manager. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used in this subsection (f), do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-35; Ord. of 4-9-2009; Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 4-143. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this article shall keep any beer, wine, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-36; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-144. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealers licensed under this article shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself/himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment or to an agent or manager to solicit for herself/himself or for the others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the beverage. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-37; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Solicitation of drinks by certain persons prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
Sec. 4-145. - Promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(2)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more alcoholic beverages for the price of one alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(d)  The police department shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this division. 
(Code 2010, § 7-3-38; Ord. of 4-9-2009) 
Sec. 4-146. - Furnishing of wine by patron to restaurant. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of the ordinance from which this section derives, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to bring into the restaurant one unopened bottle of wine for consumption on the premises, if the patron purchases a meal and consumes a portion of the bottle of wine and the meal on the restaurant's premises. In order for this provision to apply, the restaurant must establish a policy for permitting this and must charge a minimum corkage fee of $10.00 per bottle. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a restaurant to establish such a policy. Except as provided in this section, it is prohibited for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage into any retail establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this section, the term retail establishment shall not include a private hotel room or similar guest room or a private club. 
(b)  Removal of wine from restaurant by patron. Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of the ordinance from which this section derives, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off the premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine or corkage fee and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
( Ord. of 1-12-2017 ) 
Secs. 4-147—4-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FARM WINERIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Farm wineries, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 4-174. - Definitions. 
The terms "farm winery" and "tasting room" shall be defined according to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1 and as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-1) 
Sec. 4-175. - Regulations, future resolutions and revocation of licenses. 
All the provisions of the chapter are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by this body and the same may be from time to time amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual fees, the qualifications of licensees; the proscription on advertising and restrictions on the business locations of licensees and building in which said business is operated; the control of customers doing business with licensees any and all other matters which this body may deem advisable to set forth as to the proper control and regulation of the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such rules and regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be non-transferable and shall convey to the licensee no property right, but only a privilege, which may be revoked by this body. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-8) 
Sec. 4-176. - Regulations. 
No holder of a license under this chapter, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to a minor; 
(2)  Knowingly sell or serve wine to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)  Sell wine, upon the licensed premises at any time except between 7:00 a.m. and midnight, Monday through Saturday, and between 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sundays; 
(4)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of peace, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct or practices; 
(5)  Operate the licensed business in any building which does not permit full view of the inside from outside the front, or which is not well lighted inside or which does not meet the minimum distance requirements as set forth in the ordinances and resolutions of the city for malt beverage and wine consumption on the premises licensed; or operate in a temporary facility other than as approved by the city and to be utilized solely in conjunction with an event sponsored by the farm wineries association, and which is also sanctioned by the city via the appropriate festival permit and temporary tasting room license by the city for sales within temporary special entertainment districts so designated by the city; 
(6)  Maintain any type of amusement music machine or video game or utilize any device which amplifies music or voice beyond the confines of the tasting room facility; 
(7)  Allow any purchase made on the licensed premises to be taken therefrom until put into a bag or otherwise security wrapped in paper by the proprietor or clerk operating the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-4) 
Secs. 4-177—4-205. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 4-206. - Limited license. 
The farm winery license created by this division is limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the state and allows the licensee to perform any and all acts as allowed by such legislation. No license is created by the resolution authorizing any other such uses. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-9) 
Sec. 4-207. - Type of sale. 
Wine sold under a farm winery license shall be sold for retail purposes only and shall be sold only in special, limited retail facilities operated under a license issued hereunder. Such farm winery may operate a tasting room in connection with such retail sales so long as it is upon the same immediate premises as the retail sales. Sale by the drink may be allowed in such tasting rooms to the extent consistent with the law, rules and regulations of the state. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-2) 
Sec. 4-208. - Professionals. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions, as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees or gross receipts, combined with profitability ratio; or 
(2)  A fee of $250.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection (a)(2) shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and frame work. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by July 1 of each year. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 4-209. - Retail licensee qualifications. 
(a)  The retail licensee must be a person of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(1)  No license shall be granted to any person who shall have been convicted of a felony; or any crime including misdemeanors involving moral turpitude, or any misdemeanor involving abuse of alcohol in any form. The applicant shall provide a clear G.C.I.C. report of the manager of the premises prior to the issuance of any license under the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  Licenses may be issued to individual applicants, partnerships, or corporations. Upon making application for a license, an individual, partnership, or corporation shall be required to divulge the names of any and all persons who have or will have any interest, monetary or otherwise in the business to be operated under said license. In addition, the application shall set forth the purpose, location for said business operation, including the plans for the building in which said business shall be operated and a plat of the property on which said building shall be situated. 
(3)  The licensee shall be the owner, lessee, or manage of the premises for which the license is held, and said licensee shall be active in, and solely responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted. If a corporation, the licensee will be the manager, and said licensee shall be active in, and responsible for the management and operation of the business, whether or not a shareholder of said corporation. The manager of said premises must be a bona fide resident of the state for at least six months prior to making application for a license. 
(4)  No license shall be granted to any public official, state, county or municipal, nor shall any license be granted to any person to operate a business wherein a public official as defined above has any interest in a business being operated under a license issued hereunder subsequent to the issuance of same, said license shall be automatically revoked. However, unless otherwise prohibited by state law, family members and relatives of public officials will not be deemed to be public officials under the provisions of these regulations. 
(5)  Each applicant shall make a sworn statement of his/her qualifications pursuant to the foregoing provisions of subsection (a)(2) of this section and place same on file with the city clerk, before any license is issued. 
(b)  Any misrepresentation or concealment of fact in said application or sworn statement shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-3) 
Sec. 4-210. - License fee. 
(a)  The applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine and operation of a tasting room shall pay to the city clerk the sum of $50.00 as an annual license fee for the operation of one year beginning on the January 1, or alternatively $25.00 as a license fee for a temporary tasting room license dependent upon the application submitted. 
(b)  All licensed retailers shall store all wine in their possession on the premises for which the license is issued and not at another place or places except upon written permission from the issuing authority upon written application thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-6) 
Sec. 4-211. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation of a license by the issuing body. 
(b)  A license shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article, or any future ordinance or resolution pertaining thereto, and subject to revocation at any time. In case of revocation, the licensee shall not be entitled to return of the unearned license fee. All such licenses shall have printed on the front the following: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia." 
(c)  Any license granted hereunder may be revoked after hearing, for any cause deemed sufficient by said city council. Notice of such hearing shall be given either personally or by leaving same at licensed place of business at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice, given in the name of the city council or of the mayor, may include notice that the license is suspended pending hearing; in which case the licensee shall immediately cease to operate his business until further order. All decisions approving, denying, suspending, or revoking such permits or licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally upon timely application; any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the governing authority regarding a permit or license shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2013, § 7-10-5) 
Secs. 4-212—4-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TAXATION 

Sec. 4-231. - Tax on malt beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city, a specific excise tax to be computed as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  Each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the city. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day at the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(c)  No decal, stamp, or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages sold within the city. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-42) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 4-232. - Tax on wine. 
(a)  In addition to the retail license fee prescribed in section 4-46, there is hereby assessed an excise tax on wine based on sales, in the following amounts: the sum of $0.22 per liter which sum shall be paid and collected in the following manner. 
(b)  Tax on each liter shall be imposed on the retailer and collected by the wholesaler at the time of delivery to the retailer and the same shall be remitted on or before the 20th day of each month following the date of such sales. Each wholesaler doing business in the city shall maintain a copy of each invoice showing the date, place and license number of the retailer. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least one year and shall be open for inspection at any time by any authorized representative of the city. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-41) 
State Law reference— Local excise taxation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-60. 
Sec. 4-233. - Excise tax on package sales of distilled spirits. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits within the city, a specific excise tax to be computed where alcoholic beverages are sold in bottles or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.22 per liter, excluding fortified wines, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of the liter shall be imposed. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-43) 
Sec. 4-234. - Excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  In addition, an excise tax of three percent is hereby levied and imposed on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on charges to the public for the beverages. 
(b)  The excise tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(c)  Each person responsible for the payment of the excise tax levied under this section shall remit payments and file reports as provided in this division; however, persons collecting the tax authorized by this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. Failure to submit timely reports will result in the imposition of a ten percent penalty. After 30 days, interest will accrue at the rate of five percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes. 
State Law reference— Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-130 et seq. 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - County ordinance adopted. 
The provisions of chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances of Cherokee County, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Chapter 8 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Wellhead protection. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(b)  Wellhead protection zone. There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 1,000 feet. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under subsection (c) of this section; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead; 
(e)  Administration. The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-5) 
Sec. 8-2. - Rain sensor shut off required. 
All irrigation systems installed within the City of Ball Ground Water Service Delivery Area and within the corporate city limits must be equipped with a rain sensor shut off. 
( Ord. of 9-14-2017(2) ) 
Sec. 8-3. - Outdoor burning prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, or as otherwise set forth in this Code, no persons shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse, rubbish, brush, wood, trash, leaves, tree limbs or other combustible materials anywhere in the city. 
(b)  The following are exceptions to the prohibition on outside burning: 
(1)  Outdoor burning in connection with the preparation of food for immediate human consumption; 
(2)  Small wood only fires contained in an outdoor fireplace or fire pit. 
(3)  Burning associated with the operation of devices that require open flame, such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, gas grills, charcoal grills and other flame making equipment, provided that the use of such equipment does not violate other local or state laws. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this section, and may issue citations for violations thereof. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, any person violating any provision of this section which results in a fire requiring the response of the fire department shall also be liable for the costs incurred by the fire department in responding to the fire, including actual labor costs, costs of equipment operation, and costs of materials. 
( Ord. of 5-11-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-4—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the state erosion and sedimentation control act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 8-28. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26 (b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-2) 
Sec. 8-22. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city manager and/or director of public works may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the councilmember-appointed roads and streets committee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager and/or director of public works. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the chairperson of the city roads and streets committee or his designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the city manager and/or director of public works then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager and/or director of public works shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city municipal court may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the chief of police or any officer of his department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-7) 
Sec. 8-23. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-1(1.1)) 
Sec. 8-24. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-1(1.3)) 
Sec. 8-25. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-1(1.2)) 
Sec. 8-26. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-1(1.5)) 
Sec. 8-27. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city manager and/or the director of public works shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city manager and/or the director of public works ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city manager and/or the director of public works shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city manager to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city manager may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager and/or director of public works access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city manager and/or director of public works has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-5) 
Sec. 8-28. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city manager as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city manager. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-3) 
Sec. 8-29. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-4) 
Sec. 8-30. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city and the state EPD within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in subsection (b) of this section is a violation of this article. 
(Code 2010, § 10-6-6) 
Secs. 8-31—8-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the (local jurisdiction) or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-2) 
Sec. 8-50. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in subsection (2) of this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated, upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary, to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described in subsections (2)a. through c of this section, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-7) 
Sec. 8-51. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives, to: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(7)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(8)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-1(1.1)) 
Sec. 8-52. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city administrator or his designee to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city administrator or his designee. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-1(1.2)) 
Sec. 8-53. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-1(1.4)) 
Sec. 8-54. - Designation of administrator. 
The city administrator or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-1(1.3)) 
Sec. 8-55. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-1(1.6)) 
Sec. 8-56. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond, if applicable; and 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(1)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(2)  To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
a.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
b.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
c.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, the greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the state. Subsection (c)(3)c., d., e. and f of this section shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the state as appropriate, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
a.  Common address and legal description of site. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (d) of this section; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in subsection (d) of this section must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in subsection (d) of this section; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the state erosion and sedimentation control act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d) of this section. 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(3)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(4)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(5)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in this subsection (d). 
(6)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) of this section (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (e)(3) of this section and this subsection (e)(4) shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 8-58(b). 
(f)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(g)  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(3)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-3) 
Sec. 8-57. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the state stormwater management manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the state stormwater management manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity; and 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. 
a.  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the state stormwater management manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the state stormwater management manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
b.  Applicants shall consult the state stormwater management manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the state stormwater management manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to: culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the state safe dams act and rules for dam safety as applicable. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-4) 
Sec. 8-58. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(1)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-5) 
Sec. 8-59. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(1)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right of entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Code 2010, § 10-9-6) 
Secs. 8-60—8-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION/OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 8-77. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  Provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  Promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  Promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  Encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  Encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  Promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  Conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  Preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Code 2010, § 10-7-1) 
Sec. 8-78. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the following R-80, R-40, R-30 and R-20 as a use by right. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan . The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Code 2010, § 10-7-2) 
Sec. 8-79. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, Applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 8-80 of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 8-80, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 8-80, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the subdivision code. 
(Code 2010, § 10-7-3) 
Sec. 8-80. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. The term "open space" means the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight-inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the jurisdiction. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Code 2010, § 10-7-4) 
Secs. 8-81—8-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8-91. - Waste of water; prohibitions. 
(a)  The following uses are a waste or unreasonable use or method of use of water and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water to escape from any premises onto public right-of-way, such as streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property; 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device during rain; 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler heads; 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, or a leaking valve, or a leaking outdoor faucet, or a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leaks, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, within 30 days; 
(5)  Washing any vehicle with a hose and not having a water shut-off nozzle or allowing water to run continuously from a hose while washing any vehicle is also prohibited. 
( Ord. of 9-14-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 8-92. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The restrictions in section (waste of water; prohibitions) do not apply to the following authorized uses: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities; 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure, as required by erosion and sedimentation rules; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, where water is the appropriate methodology; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are not available; 
(5)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative exists; 
(6)  Water used for power washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, unless prohibited by drought restrictions; 
(7)  Mobile car washes when approved or a special use permit is obtained from the local authority; 
(8)  Emptying of swimming pools for maintenance when proper local rules are followed. 
( Ord. of 9-14-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 8-93. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Water wasting includes water waste by any classifications of user. 
(b)  Whenever the director of public works, city manager or mayor determines that there is a waste of water in or about premises to which water is supplied from the city, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, said waste may cause the water to be cut off. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  In addition to the penalty provided for the violation of this article, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 9-14-2017(1) ) 
Chapter 10 - HUMAN RELATIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Fair housing laws adopted. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 3, article 4 (O.C.G.A. § 8-3-220 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-5-1—6-5-10) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Special provisions for insurance companies. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city; there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee for each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance. Said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for each year. 
(c)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8-2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-21(a)—(e); Ord. of 6-9-2011) 
State Law reference— Municipal licensing and taxation of insurance companies and agents, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
Sec. 12-2. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of those institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in that return. 
(c)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-31; Ord. of 12-5-1983) 
Secs. 12-3—12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 12-23. - Tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefore shall be established each year and duly recorded in the minutes of the meeting of council. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 12-24. - Tax due and payable. 
All ad valorem taxes due the city shall he billed and paid in one payment. Each year upon receipt of the tax digest from the county tax commissioner, the mayor and council shall establish a tax levy and due date. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-12_ 
Sec. 12-25. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued hereunder shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law and no penalty shall be charged except in lieu of interest. 
(Code 2010, § 2-5-13) 
Secs. 12-26—12-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 12-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multi-line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC section 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC section 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Heavy industrial means any business or profession employing more than 100 full-and part-time employees and/or a business with a yearly average inventory value exceeding $150,000.00 or gross receipts in excess of $1,000,000.00. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, non-profit corporations or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioners of profession or occupation means one who, by state law, requires state licensing regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioners of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designed as a license fee, permit fee or by any other name which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee, development impact fee as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other cost or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 12-55. - Occupation tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out of state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If that taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the revenue collection officer of this officer's deputies or to any police officer or their designee, upon request. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-1) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 58-13-7. 
Sec. 12-56. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(b). 
Sec. 12-57. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Tax levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or office in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out of state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  For all businesses and professions, with the exception of businesses or professions classified as heavy industrial, a unit, business occupation tax shall be calculated based upon the number of employees or the business or practitioner as herein specified. Each business shall submit to the city by February 1 of each year, on forms deemed sufficient by the city clerk, an accounting of employees showing the highest and lowest number of employees for the previous calendar year. The city clerk shall then calculate the average number of employee's for the preceding year upon which the following business and occupation fees are based. 
(2)  For all businesses classified as heavy industrial, the business occupation tax shall be based upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U. S. Office of Management and Budget and the U. S. Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. 
(1)  Tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time-to-time by the mayor and council. 

 
(2)  Profitability ratio in connection with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratio in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time-to-time by the mayor and council. 

 
(c)  Restrictions on tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required for those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  No occupation tax shall be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. 
(4)  No occupation tax shall be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(5)  No occupation tax shall be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the state. 
(7)  Out of state businesses, when relocating in the state, shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined by O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-4) 
State Law reference— Allocation of gross receipts, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14. 
Sec. 12-58. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 12-59. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-6) 
State Law reference— Effective of multiple locations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 12-60. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for government. 
Any practitioners whose office is maintained and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(3). 
Sec. 12-61. - Purpose and scope tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable business and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-9) 
Sec. 12-62. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable on January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the sheriff and/or local police may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-10) 
State Law reference— Due date, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20. 
Sec. 12-63. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-11) 
State Law reference— Gross receipts allocations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14. 
Sec. 12-64. - Exemption on grounds that business is operation for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose and the business is designated by the IRS as charitable. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-12) 
Sec. 12-65. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-13) 
Sec. 12-66. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-14) 
Sec. 12-67. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-15) 
Sec. 12-68. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-6—33-8.8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A.§ 48-13-55. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-18) 
Sec. 12-69. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
Any occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-19) 
Sec. 12-70. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-21) 
Sec. 12-71. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the mayor and city council, through their agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The mayor or councilmember or their designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the mayor or councilmember or their designee such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the mayor or councilmember or their designee at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 25 percent will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-22) 
Sec. 12-72. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-23) 
Sec. 12-73. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The mayor and city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Code 2010, § 7-1-24) 
Secs. 12-74—12-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING 

Sec. 12-104. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Contributions means the promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or value. 
Itinerant merchant, solicitor and peddler . 
(1)  Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, including anyone who, in furtherance of such purpose, displays samples, model goods, wares or merchandise within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
(2)  Peddler means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers, or giving or leaving leaflets, pamphlets or other items that promote or advertise the sale of goods or the provision of services for profit. 
(3)  Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares, or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or seeking information, money, donations or financial assistance for any purpose whatsoever, or soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(4)  The terms "solicitor," "itinerant merchant" and "peddler" shall not include the following classifications of individuals: 
a.  Any person, firm or corporation who solicits orders for future delivery of goods to merchants for the merchants' resale. The orders solicited from merchants shall be orders for future delivery only. 
b.  Individuals who sell agricultural produce produced by that individual. 
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock organization or league, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
Religious organization means an entity which: 
(1)  Conducts regular worship services; or 
(2)  Is qualified as a religious organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value from another. These requests may be accomplished by using any of the following methods: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication; 
(3)  The making of any announcement to the press over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution; or 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing. 
The term "solicitation" shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same received any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this article. 
Sec. 12-105. - Registration. 
(a)  Each person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(b)  Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative an application fee, as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, complete an application and a background investigation questionnaire. The chief of police will complete a background investigation within 30 days of application and either approve, deny or delay the application. If the application is approved the applicant shall pay a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council and shall carry the receipt for the fee, and must carry a valid state or government issued photographic identification card and produce the same to law enforcement upon request. 
(c)  Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 2010, §§ 7-2-1—7-2-3) 
Sec. 12-106. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit after sundown. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the city clerk in accordance with this article or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to immediately leave a person's property after being told to do so. 
(Code 2010, § 7-2-4) 
Secs. 12-107—12-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 12-126. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "yard sale" is defined as the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined above, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales, and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 2010, § 7-6-1) 
Sec. 12-127. - Time restriction. 
Yard sales shall be limited to three consecutive day periods. No more than one such sale shall be held at the same address within any three months except as approved by the city council at a regular meeting. 
(Code 2010, § 7-6-2) 
Sec. 12-128. - Signs; advertising. 
Signs must comply with the city appendix A of this Code, division 112. 
(Code 2010, § 7-6-3) 
Secs. 12-129—12-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.; local licensing and regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-155. - Required records; inspection of records and goods. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: 
(1)  The date of the transaction; 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; 
(3)  The name, age, and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer; and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; 
(4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued for the purchase price or loan; 
(8)  The maturity date of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Entries shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(c)  The record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for in this section shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(d)  Any person subject to this article, or any licensee or employee thereof, who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section or shall make false entries concerning the transactions named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection or examination by any police officer of the books and of the property pledged or sold to the licensee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 44-12-131—44-12-133. 
Sec. 12-156. - Daily report to police; fingerprinting and identification of customers. 
(a)  Daily report. Every licensee under this division shall make a daily report in writing to the chief of police, or any designated agent, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all property pledged, received, traded, bartered, bought or otherwise acquired by the licensee during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such report shall be typewritten and mailed or hand-delivered to the designated agent of the chief of police within 24 hours of the end of the day covered by the report. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, the report shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(2)  The time of the transaction; 
(3)  The serial number of the pawn tickets; 
(4)  The amount paid or advanced; 
(5)  A full description of the articles, with sufficient information to identify each of such articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of precious metals or gemstones, if any, and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and 
(6)  A description of the person pledging, selling or pawning the article, including his name, address, color, weight and height. 
Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any licensee or employee thereof making an insufficient report shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Fingerprinting of customers and other required information. In addition to other records and information as required in subsection (a) of this section, each licensee shall obtain from each person pawning, pledging or selling any article with such licensee the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the article shall be obtained and a notation made as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms to be furnished by the chief of police, and the licensee shall obtain all other information called for on such form. Fingerprints and the information required in this subsection (b) shall be obtained from all persons each time such persons pawn any article with the licensee, regardless of whether or not that person may have previously pawned an article with such licensee and have been fingerprinted. 
(c)  Customer identification. In addition to the fingerprinting requirements of subsection (b) of this section, each licensee shall require that any person pawning, pledging, bartering, exchanging, selling or entering into any transaction with the business shall display evidence of identification, such as a duly issued driver's license with a picture, or other similar evidence containing a picture of the customer, and the licensee shall record the driver's license number or other number or feature of such evidence of identification. 
(d)  Violations. The failure of any licensee or employee thereof to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in this Code. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-7) 
Sec. 12-157. - Employee's permit. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been issued an annual personal identification card or permit by the chief of police authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. Such a permit shall not be issued to any person who has been convicted within five years prior to the application for employment for any misdemeanor or felony involving theft, burglary or crimes against property, any felony involving drugs or controlled substances, any violation of this article, or any other crime involving moral turpitude. The term "conviction," for purposes of this section, shall mean any adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere. No permit shall be issued as long as there are outstanding criminal warrants, criminal charges, accusations or indictments for any of the crimes specified in this section on which there has been no final disposition or adjudication, and any such application involving any such pending charges shall be held for any final decision until final disposition or adjudication of such charges. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-8) 
Sec. 12-158. - Hours of operation. 
No licensee under this division shall operate his place of business except during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-9) 
Sec. 12-159. - Holding period for goods received. 
All personal property acquired by a licensee under this division, whether by pawn, purchase, barter, trade or otherwise, shall be held and maintained by the licensee at the licensed location, or at such other impound location as may have been previously approved by the chief of police in writing, for a minimum of 30 days, prior to disposal of the property by the licensee, except in instances where the property is redeemed by the pawner. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-10) 
Sec. 12-160. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or his agents or employees to receive in pawn, pledge or sale goods of any character or description from a minor. For purposes of this section, the term "minor" means any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-11) 
Secs. 12-161—12-188. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-189. - License required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop, shall first file an application with the city clerk to obtain a license to conduct such a business. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-1) 
Sec. 12-190. - Application for license; issuance of license. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this division shall be at least 21 years in age and make written application to the city council through the city clerk for such privilege, and shall supply such information as may be required by the city clerk or the chief of police. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(2)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application, with prejudice. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogation any persons who are considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license, as may be requested by the city council or its duly authorized representative, such as the chief of police, the city attorney or the city clerk. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(b)  Use of premises for sale of used goods. No pawnshop shall be operated at the same location or in the same premises with the sale of, dealing in or exchange or handling of other than new goods, wares or merchandise. No license for the sale of, dealing in or exchange or handling of other than new goods, wares or merchandise shall be issued for a location licensed as a pawnshop. 
(c)  Notification to city of changes in information. Licensees shall immediately notify the city, in writing, through the city clerk, of any change in any information, material or data furnished in connection with an application for a license, or of any material change in the type of business or ownership or qualifications of the applicant or employees subsequent to license issuance. 
(d)  Citizenship and residency requirements. 
(1)  No license shall be granted under this division to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a legal alien and who has not been a resident of the county for a period of one year prior to filing the application. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder must meet the residence requirements set out in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and the license shall be issued to the corporation and the majority stockholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(e)  Applicants with prior convictions. 
(1)  No license shall be issued under this division to any person for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest, either as owner, partner, principal stockholder or licensee, whether such interest is direct or indirect, or beneficial or absolute, or his spouse, has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere, within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance which would have any effect on the applicant's ability to properly conduct such a business, except traffic offenses. The term "conviction," as used in this section, shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond or violation of a municipal or county ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, chief of police may, after investigation, waive the violation as a disqualification. 
(2)  The city council, on appeal, may waive any conviction as a disqualification if it finds that it would have no material effect upon the applicant's ability to properly conduct its business if such license were granted. 
(f)  Investigation of applicant. All applications for a license for a pawnshop shall be investigated, and the chief of police shall report his recommendations to the city council. A copy of such report shall be filed with the business license application in the office of the city clerk. 
(g)  Time limit for obtaining license. All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the city council, and, if not so obtained, the approval granted by the city council shall be void. 
(h)  Issuance. When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the finance office the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-2) 
Sec. 12-191. - Display of license number. 
Each pawnshop licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription "City of Ball Ground Pawnshop License Number ____________ ," in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-3) 
Sec. 12-192. - Time limit for commencement of business; cessation of operation. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this division must, within three months after the issuance of the license, open the establishment referred to in the license for business, unless such period is extended by the city clerk. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall, upon completion of the three-month period, automatically forfeit his license, and the license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity for any further action of the city clerk. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-4) 
Sec. 12-193. - Transfer of license. 
No license granted to a pawnshop shall be transferable except upon application to the city council in the same form and manner and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another person doing the same business at the same place as the person to whom the license was originally issued. When permission for transfer has been granted, the original licensee or transferee shall cause the license to be delivered to the city clerk, who shall record such transfer, and the transferee shall pay a fee therefore as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the license. The fee for such transfer shall be kept on file as part of the schedule of fees in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2010, § 7-8-5) 
Secs. 12-194—12-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-225. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis of depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contract with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-2) 
Sec. 12-226. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.. In addition, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-27) 
Sec. 12-227. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-32) 
Sec. 12-228. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many type of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-1) 
Sec. 12-229. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-28) 
Sec. 12-230. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-6) 
Sec. 12-231. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-15) 
Sec. 12-232. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subsection of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-3) 
Sec. 12-233. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-4) 
Sec. 12-234. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-7) 
Sec. 12-235. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-8) 
Sec. 12-236. - Location. 
(a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-9) 
Sec. 12-237. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the business license representative and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-19) 
Sec. 12-238. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time if ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of the intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-10) 
Sec. 12-239. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-29) 
Sec. 12-240. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-30) 
Sec. 12-241. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seam removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-31) 
Secs. 12-242—12-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 12-261. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-5) 
Sec. 12-262. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city business license designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The business license representative shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city business license representative at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-11) 
Sec. 12-263. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the business license representative. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection (10) pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Municipal Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection (17) for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-12) 
Sec. 12-264. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible manager officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-13) 
Sec. 12-265. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant if a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the offenses found in section 12-263(14), or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses found in section 12-263(14), or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-14) 
Sec. 12-266. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the business license representative of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the business license representative. The representative shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-16) 
Sec. 12-267. - Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-17) 
Sec. 12-268. - Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2010, § 7-9-18) 
Sec. 12-269. - Appeals. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the business license representative. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The business license representative shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for city council action. 
(c)  When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the board may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. 
(d)  The city clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(e)  Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(f)  The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(g)  The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(h)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the business license representative and the police chief. 
(i)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(j)  The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 2010, §§ 7-9-20—7-9-26) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1. 

Sec. 14-1. - Municipal judge. 
The judge shall preside over the municipal court. The mayor and council shall appoint the judge annually at the first council meeting each year. 
(Code 2010, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Clerk. 
The mayor and council shall designate a clerk of the municipal court, who shall keep such records and make such reports as required by the mayor and council or the judge. The council may designate the city clerk or other municipal employee to serve as clerk of the court. 
(Code 2010, § 2-3-2) 
State Law reference— Municipal court clerk training, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-13. 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The standards adopted in chapter 103, article II, provided that such standards as applied to property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.). 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the state controlled substances act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
Public officer means the city officer or city employee designed by the city to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
Sec. 16-20. - Findings. 
The city council finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
State Law reference— Required findings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 16-21. - Duty of property owners. 
(a)  The owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city shall construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to construct or maintain buildings which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or which constitute an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. Such buildings, include, but are not limited to, those: 
(1)  Whose interior or exterior bearing walls, or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such member or members below the minimum required by the building codes of the city. 
(2)  Which have parts which are so attached that they are likely to fall and injure persons or property. 
(3)  Which in whole or in part are so dilapidated, decayed, damaged from any cause or deteriorated in any manner that they are likely to cause injury to persons or property. 
(4)  Which are likely to cause injury to persons or property because they contain weakened, defective or deteriorated: 
a.  Footings or foundations; 
b.  Floorings or floor supports; 
c.  Ceilings or ceiling supports; 
d.  Roof or chimney. 
(5)  Which have visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support. 
(6)  Which are likely to cause injury to persons or property in the event of catastrophe, wind storm, fire, earthquake, panic because of inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators, fire escapes or other means of egress as required by the building and safety codes of the city. 
(7)  Which are likely to cause injury or are contrary to the general safety and public welfare to persons or property because they have defective or inadequate plumbing, improper sanitation facilities, insufficient ventilation, or lack of running water, as required by the building codes or other ordinances of the city, or that provide a habitat for infestation of vermin and other pests. 
(8)  Which constitute fire hazards as defined in applicable ordinances and which are thereby dangerous to persons or property. 
(9)  Which are vacant, and because of lack of proper maintenance, deterioration or decay, fire hazards, or fire damage are otherwise dangerous to human life, safety, health or morals. 
(10)  Buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes, so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city. 
(b)  The creation or maintenance of any of the following by the owner of any dwelling, building, structure, or property shall be unlawful, an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions and a public nuisance: 
(1)  Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the city. 
(2)  The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)  The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises or flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Any building, business, thing, machine, or machinery erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Any enclosure or other area in which any animals are kept, including, but not limited to, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement, rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, maintained on the premises for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current annual motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)  Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(14)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(15)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-2-51, 9-2-1—9-2-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(1). 
Sec. 16-22. - Complaint or determination. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-2-52, 9-2-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9(a)(3), 41-2-10. 
Sec. 16-23. - Abatement order. 
(a)  After the notice and hearing provided for in section 16-22, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the municipal court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the municipal court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor one in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(Code 2010, § 6-2-53) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(4). 
Sec. 16-24. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(b)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and city council are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or city tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-2-55, 9-2-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(5)—(a)(7). 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle and shotgun, or to shoot an air gun, including BB gun and pellet gun, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-5) 
Sec. 18-2. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 18-3. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 18-4. - Noise; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county nor the city, nor to public agencies. 
(10)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(11)  Engine brakes. Use of engine brakes and compression brakes prohibited. 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Engine brake or compression brake or dynamic braking system means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes, which devices are commonly referred to as "air brakes," "Jacob's brakes" or "jake brakes." 
Prohibited streets means those roads within the city where the use of engine brakes or compression brakes are illegal and include the following: 
1.  A. W. Roberts Drive (State Route 372). 
2.  Gilmer Ferry Road (State Route 372). 
3.  Ball Ground Highway (State Route 372). 
These streets shall be posted with signs indicating that the use of dynamic braking systems are prohibited. 
b.  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle to use an engine or compression braking device while traveling along the prohibited streets except to effect an emergency stop. 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefore; and 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d)  The prohibitions shall not he applicable to any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-3; Ord. of 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 18-5. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at time or in a manner not usual for a law abiding individual under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered and determined in whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for the offense under this section, offer the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern, which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting a person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 18-6. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city or in any public place in an intoxicated and disorderly condition. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-2) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 18-7. - Public drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages while on or in any public way, or upon any way that the public has the right of access to, to include parking areas open to the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages upon any city-owned property except whereat an executive committee approved special event permit has been issued. 
(Code 2010, § 9-1-9) 
Chapter 20 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal recreation generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 20-19. - Use of facilities; reservations. 
(a)  All park properties are to be used on a first-come, first-served basis. Reservations will be taken for ball fields, tennis courts and pavilions. 
(b)  The first priority for the use of park properties shall be given to the residents of the city and the county. 
(c)  The practice time for the ball fields shall be on a first-come, first-served basis. Scheduled league and tournament play shall have first priority. 
(d)  No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or any of the buildings or structures therein, except validly reserved ball fields, tennis courts and pavilions for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons. No person shall use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(e)  Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-1; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-20. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  City parks shall be open to the public daily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No person other than city personnel conducting city business, or engaging in a city sponsored event, shall occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(b)  Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the city manager or chief of police at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular stated intervals. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-2; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-21. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person using the parks, grounds or facilities shall: 
(1)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal. 
(2)  Disturb the peace, or use any language reasonably calculated to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. 
(3)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(4)  Engage in fighting. 
(5)  Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverages unless specifically approved as a public event, approved in writing by the city manager (wine tasting, wine and arts festival etc.). 
(6)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use. 
(7)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park. 
(8)  Use boats, canoes, or any other flotation device in any waters or waterways, except by city employees or contractors involved in parks maintenance activities. 
(9)  Violate the noise ordinance as per city ordinance, with the exception of city sponsored events. 
(10)  Skateboard in any area not specifically designed for that use. 
(11)  Park overnight. Vehicles remaining in any city park parking area after 10:00 p.m. are subject to being towed. 
(b)  Children over 12 years of age are prohibited from climbing on or playing on the children's playground structure at Calvin Farmer Park. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-3; Ord. of 6-26-2014; Ord. of 10-9-2014) 
Sec. 20-22. - Motor vehicles. 
No person shall drive or park any motorized vehicle except on streets, driveways or parking lots in the park, or park or leave such a vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-4; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-23. - Limitations on games. 
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-5; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-24. - Fires restricted. 
No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in areas and under regulations as may be designated by the recreation director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper of other inflammable material within any park area or on any contiguous highway, road or street. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-6; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-25. - Camping prohibited. 
No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purposes. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by the city manager for city sanctioned events. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-7; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-26. - Unleashed dogs, animals prohibited. 
No person shall bring any dangerous animal into any park. Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 30-40-1, no dog may be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than ten feet long and under full control of the person holding the leash. No animals are permitted in the viewing areas of any baseball or softball field and no animals are permitted within 100 feet of any concession stand. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-8; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-27. - Sales prohibited. 
No person shall vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park, except at city sanctioned fairs and events. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-9; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-28. - Signs prohibited. 
No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. This provision shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-10; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-29. - Outdoor tennis and basketball courts. 
No person shall be permitted within the limits of the outdoor tennis and basketball courts unless they are actively engaged in the sport of tennis or basketball. Spectators shall remain outside the fence. No other activities such as running, jumping, bicycling, skateboarding, roller blading, etc., are allowed on the tennis and basketball court surfaces. Only soft soled shoes such as basketball shoes or tennis shoes are permitted on the basketball and tennis court surfaces. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-11; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 20-30. - Ball Ground city gym. 
Use of the city gym will be on a reservation basis only with priority given to basketball. Use of the facility will be scheduled through the parks and recreation committee with a rental fee of $25.00 per hour of use. This rate is subject to change from time to time and may be increased without notice except where a rental contract has already been entered. Only basketball shoes are permitted on the court surface. No animals are allowed in the gym. 
(Code 2010, § 4-3-12; Ord. of 6-26-2014) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage means all household or domestic waste, including waste from the preparation and cooking of food, vegetable, fruit, and meat scraps, ashes, cans and bottles, paper floor sweepings, cardboard, and other such material to be disposed of from residences, churches, schools, office buildings, and small business establishments and similar places. 
Incineration means the process of converting any combustible material into an inert noncombustible ash or residue by burning. 
Industrial refuse means waste material from industrial processes, automobile bodies or other motor vehicle bodies, manufacturing, textile or otherwise, canneries, slaughter houses, packing plants, poultry processing plants, or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. 
Private contractor means any person, other than a municipality, who collects, removes, salvages, scavenges and/or disposes of refuse from one or more public or private premises, other than his own, whether or not under written contract, and whether or not for compensation. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, and/or industrial refuse. 
Refuse receptacles means a can, compartment, bin or other container used to keep, collect, or store refuse pending its removal for disposal. 
Rubbish means tree branches, twigs, grass and shrub clippings, weeds, leaves and/or street sweepings. 
Sanitary landfill means the orderly disposition of refuse in accordance with the state department of natural resources regulations so as to prevent any stench and/or nuisance. 
(Code 2010, § 4-2-1; Ord. of 6-9-1975) 
Sec. 22-20. - Refuse storage. 
(a)  At no time shall refuse and/or refuse receptacles be placed in such a manner as to obstruct gutters, drains, walkways, streets, or other passageways. 
(b)  No road ditches or roads shall be used for dumping or disposal of refuse. 
(c)  No dumping or disposal of refuse shall be in any stream, creek, lake, swamp or other body of water. 
(d)  No industrial refuse shall be burned. 
(Code 2010, § 4-2-2; Ord. of 6-9-1975) 
Sec. 22-21. - Refuse collection. 
(a)  All equipment used for the collection and transportation of refuse shall be so designed as to prevent the escape of any refuse therefrom. Such equipment shall be provided with a watertight body designed so as to prevent the escape of any liquid. All surfaces of collection and transportation equipment coming in contact with garbage or organic industrial waste shall be smooth, nonabsorbent and in good repair. 
(b)  All equipment used in the collection and transportation of refuse shall be thoroughly washed and treated with an approved insecticide so as to prevent fly breeding or odor nuisance. All refuse spilled during collection or transportation shall be promptly removed by the refuse collector. 
(Code 2010, § 4-2-3; Ord. of 6-9-1975) 
Sec. 22-22. - Refuse disposal. 
(a)  All refuse accumulating within the city shall be disposed of by sanitary landfill; provided that other methods of disposal may be used with the written permission of the mayor and council. 
(b)  No person shall hereafter establish or operate any new disposal facility without first submitting plans and specifications to the mayor and council and receiving its written approval as regards disposal site, methods of disposal, adequacy of equipment and supervision, and other pertinent matters. Existing disposal facilities shall be operated in such a manner as to prevent nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall have the authority to close or cause to be closed, abandoned, improved, repaired or revised, any refuse disposal facility or collection equipment which does not comply with this chapter or which is a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(d)  Dead animals shall be buried deeply enough to prevent any stench and/or nuisance. The responsibility for proper disposal of dead animals shall be the owner's. 
(Code 2010, § 4-2-4; Ord. of 6-9-1975) 
Sec. 22-23. - Private contractors. 
(a)  No private contractor shall collect, scavenge and/or dispose of refuse or salvage any component thereof within the city unless he holds an unrevoked permit from the mayor and council. Only private contractors who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. The fee for the permit shall be established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Permits may be temporarily suspended by the mayor and council upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter. Permits may be revoked after opportunity for a hearing by the mayor and council upon serious or repeated violation. 
(Code 2010, § 4-2-5; Ord. of 6-9-1975) 
Secs. 22-24—22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 22-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. §16-7-51(6), . 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-2) 
Sec. 22-51. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
a.  By a fine of not less than $200.00. 
b.  Higher fines may be levied as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right of way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(3)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(c)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the city are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-5) 
Sec. 22-52. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-1(1.1)) 
Sec. 22-53. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-1(1.3)) 
Sec. 22-54. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-1(1.2)) 
Sec. 22-55. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-3) 
Sec. 22-56. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Code 2010, § 10-5-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-254. 
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Street or sidewalk repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person, firm or corporation making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 24-2. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation, of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-6) 
Secs. 24-3—24-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-23. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 24-24. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-5) 
Secs. 24-25—24-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 24-52. - Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 24-53. - Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 24-52, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 24-54. - City indemnified. 
Any person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 24-52 and 24-53 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 2010, § 4-1-3) 
Secs. 24-55—24-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 24-82—24-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 24-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator. The city clerk shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other use of public property for private purposes. The city clerk may be assisted by other employees of the clerk's office. 
Private organization or group of private persons means a private organization or group of persons shall be any firm, partnership, corporation, association, or group of individuals more than three in number, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means a private purpose shall be any purpose not commanded or directed by statute, ordinance, or other regulation to be performed by the state, county, city or other governmental entity. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-1) 
Sec. 24-107. - Required. 
Every private organization or group of private persons who wish to use public property for private purposes in holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other activity within this city is hereby required to have a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in any such activity within the corporate limits, unless city permitting is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this Code. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 24-108. - Application fee. 
Every private organization or group of private persons required to procure a permit under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for the permit to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted not less than 60 days before the day of the parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other activity is proposed by the applicant. 
(2)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Time and place where the proposed activity is to be carried on, including routes of passage of parades or other processions; 
c.  Kind and class of activity to be carried on; 
d.  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)  Each application shall he signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article shall be kept in strict confidence by the city; shall not be subject to public inspection; and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this article. 
(5)  False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit or denial of the application. 
(6)  Any application, permit and registration fees as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council required under this Code shall accompany the application. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-3) 
Sec. 24-109. - Administration of article. 
The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application and issuance of permits under this article. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-4) 
Sec. 24-110. - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the application for a permit and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To review the application for completeness, collect whatever fee may be required, and, where appropriate, receive the approval in writing of the department of transportation, state highway patrol, chief of police and the sheriff, or any other necessary public officer for the requested activity. 
(3)  To submit the completed application and associated documents or other information to the mayor and council for action on the application. 
(4)  Upon approval of the application by the mayor and council, to issue to the private organization or group of private persons a permit within a reasonable time of such approval. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-5) 
Sec. 24-111. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  The administrator shall forward the application and all supporting documents in regards to routes, times and activities to the chief of police for approval of routes and street closings and event locations. The chief of police has the authority to require changes to the route and activity locations or to disapprove routes and activity locations based on matters of public safety and traffic control. The application will then be returned to the administrator. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided the administrator shall forward the recommendation and application to the mayor and council for consideration and action. 
(c)  Unless some significant interference with the rights of non-participating citizens exists, or the orderly flow of traffic would be obstructed unreasonably, or the public safety be endangered, or there be other unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order, and convenience of the general public, the permit shall be granted. 
(d)  Upon the express approval of the mayor and council, the administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the activity authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-6) 
Sec. 24-112. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any private organization or group of private persons, whether residents of this city or elsewhere, to engage in any activity within the city limits for which this article requires a permit, without first obtaining a permit to do so, under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any individual or any other person, whether the same be a corporation, partnership, or any other form of association, who engages in any activity for which this article requires a permit, without a permit having first been obtained under the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-7) 
Sec. 24-113. - Defense to prosecution. 
It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this article for failing to obtain a permit before engaging in any activity described in this article that a permit has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. It shall be presumed that no permit has been issued unless at his trial, the accused produces in court a valid permit or a certified copy thereof. 
(Code 2010, § 7-5-8) 
Chapter 26 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-373, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) are adopted by references as if set forth at length herein. 
(Code 2010, § 8-1-1) 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-21. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefore as for other violations of this code. 
(Code 2010, § 8-1-2) 
Sec. 26-22. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee thereof, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (1) of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council and this schedule is hereby incorporated herein and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 2010, § 8-1-4) 
Secs. 26-23—26-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-48. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly "circle the block" or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 2010, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 26-49. - Speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to the width, traffic and use thereof, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  25 miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Speed limits are further established as follows: 
(1)  On system: 

 
(2)  Off system: 

 
(d)  Signs to be erected by the city. 
(e)  School zone hours are effective: 
(1)  From 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time; school days only. 
(2)  From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time; school days only. 
(Code 2010, § 8-2-2) 
State Law reference— Speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq. 
Secs. 26-50—26-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 26-72. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 2010, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 26-73. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicated the prohibited parking. 
(b)  Parking is specifically prohibited at all times from mile point 12.17 (400 feet south of Blackwell Street, CS 777) to mile point 12.25 (Blackwell Street, CS 777), a distance of 400 feet. Parking shall be prohibited at all times along the east side of State Route 5 Business. 
(Code 2010, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 26-74. - Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicated the prohibited parking. 
(Code 2010, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 26-75. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 2010, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 26-76. - Special purpose parking zones established, parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2010, § 8-3-5) 
Secs. 26-77—26-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WEIGHT LIMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle size and load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq.; enforcement of load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27. 

Sec. 26-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Local authorities means any county, municipal or other local board of body having authority to enact laws regarding traffic under the constitution and laws of this state. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Official traffic control device means all signs, signals, markings and devices not in consistence with this chapter which are placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
Passenger car means every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor driven cycles, designed for carrying ten passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motor power other than a pole trailer designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Tractor means any self-propelled vehicle designed for use as a traveling power plant or for drawing other vehicles but having no provision for carrying loads independently. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for transportation of property. 
Weight of vehicle means the actual weight of the vehicle excluding any load. 
(Code 2010, § 8-4-1) 
Sec. 26-97. - Old Canton Road limitations. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate any vehicle, passenger car, tractor, truck, or truck tractor upon the roadway located within the city known as Old Canton Road with a gross weight exceeding 7,000 pounds. Except for those vehicles making deliveries or pickups or having some other lawful purpose along the aforesaid roadway or to a business or residence accessed from the aforesaid roadway. 
(Code 2010, § 8-4-2) 
Chapter 28 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-19. - Water and sewer system established. 
There is hereby established a water and sewer system for the city. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 28-20. - Water commissioner. 
(a)  The water and sewer system shall be administered by a water/sewer commissioner, appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of council, for a one year term of office. 
(b)  The appointment shall be made at and the term of office shall run from the first meeting of the newly elected council each year. In the event of death or resignation of the commissioner, or removal for cause by the mayor, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointment. The successor shall serve the remainder of the original term. 
(c)  The commissioner shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as the mayor and council may prescribe from time to time. The mayor shall be the contracting officer of the system and shall execute any deeds, contracts, debentures and mortgages. 
(Code 2010, §§ 5-1-2, 5-1-3) 
Sec. 28-21. - Superintendent. 
The mayor shall appoint a water and sewer system superintendent, to oversee and look after the operation and distribution of the system of the city, and he shall perform such duties as are required of him by the mayor and city manager. The superintendent shall possess a valid state water certification and shall obtain state licenses as a water distribution system operator and a wastewater collection operator within 18 months of employment. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-4) 
Secs. 28-22—28-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 28-46. - Application for service. 
All initial subscribers who wish to be furnished water and sewer services by this system must sign a written application and pay a service fee. By signing the application, all applicants shall agree to accept the requirements and conditions of these rules and regulations and all future and additional rules and regulations adopted by the system after receiving a written copy of those future and additional rules and regulations. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-21) 
Sec. 28-47. - Service fees. 
(a)  Each applicant for initial service shall pay a service fee as established from time to time by the mayor and council which shall include tie-in to the service main of the water system, the tie-in to the sewer main, the water meter and placement of the meter upon the property of the subscriber as near as possible to the juncture of the road right-of-way and property owner's property line. 
(b)  Each applicant for service where tie-in and meter already exist shall pay a service fee as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-22) 
Sec. 28-48. - Initial and minimum charges. 
All charges and billing to subscribers of the system shall be in accordance with the rate schedule as adopted from time to time by the mayor and council. Any water used over 2,000 gallons shall be rounded to the nearest 1,000 gallons. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-23) 
Sec. 28-49. - City's liability and responsibility. 
The water system shall be responsible and liable for the following: 
(1)  Installation and maintenance of main supply lines. The city system shall install main supply lines and shall be responsible for the supervision and maintenance of these main supply lines, pumping stations along the main supply line and all wet wells, reservoirs or tanks on the main supply line. 
(2)  Right to refuse service when capacity will not permit. The city shall have the right to refuse to accept applications of new subscribers when the system superintendent and the city manager determine and declare that the subscribers the city has accepted and are serving are consuming the capacity the system is able to provide. 
(3)  Responsibility for damages to property other than its own. The city shall not be responsible for repairs and damage to any property other than its own pumps, storage tanks, wet wells and water/sewer mains. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-24) 
Sec. 28-50. - Users' responsibilities. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance of service lines. The individual subscriber who shall make application as required shall be responsible for the installation of any and all service lines from the individual subscriber's water meter, installed by the city water system, to outlets on property owned or being used by that subscriber. The subscriber shall also be responsible for any and all service line connections between the building waste water system and the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Provision of suitable place for water meter when located on property owned or used by a subscriber. Each subscriber for services of the water and sewer system shall file with his application a written release signed by the owner of property on which a water meter is desired to be placed for the placement of the meter and a hold harmless clause from damages for the installation of the meter. The subscriber shall provide a suitable place for the location of the water meter at a place on property owned or being used by the subscriber near the right-of-way boundary of the property to be easily maintained and read by an employee or agent of the city water and sewer system. 
(c)  Easement when any part of the water and sewer system property is or shall be located on subscriber's land. Any subscriber that shall make application for service with the city water and sewer system shall give an easement to the city water system for placement of water and sewer system property upon property of the subscriber in providing service lines to the subscriber. 
(d)  Damage to the water and sewer system. The subscriber shall be responsible to repair and replace any property of the city system located on his property when same shall be damaged or destroyed and any other water and sewer system property that his actions may cause to be damaged or destroyed. 
(e)  Specified uses of water. Any subscriber, in consideration of the rights of other subscribers of the water and sewer system shall be permitted to use any amount of water necessary to provide the normal and usual needs of himself and his family. However, when his requirements of water shall be or become excessive, special permission of the system must be obtained before any excessive use unit or system can be tied in to the system. 
(f)  Separate connection. Each dwelling unit shall be served by a separate connection and meter. The city shall have the right to inspect meters and service lines. Where more than one premises is found on a single meter, the city shall require that separate connections be made within ten days of notice to do so. Should any property owner fail to make the required connections within the time provided by the city to do so, service to those premises shall be discontinued until such connections are completed. 
(g)  Unauthorized connection. No person shall make an unauthorized connection to the city water and sewer system or meddle or tamper with a meter or service line in such a manner that will interfere with or prevent the correct operation of the meter. No person shall cut or remove a locked that has been installed on a water meter unless that person is an employee of the city water and sewer system. Any person violating this subsection shall be liable for the full cost of repair or replacement of the meter and lines, and shall, in addition, be punished, on conviction as provided in section 1-9. 
(h)  Presumption of responsibility. Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (g) of this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25). 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-25) 
Sec. 28-51. - Extensions of mains. 
(a)  Approval. No extension of city water or sewer lines shall be made without prior approval of the commissioner of the city water system and the mayor and council. 
(b)  Who pays for extensions. Any group of people that shall require or desire the services of the city water and sewer system and shall require an extension of the present service mains and shall be outside of or beyond the boundary and terminal points of those mains as they are now proposed and platted may contract for the extension of mains with the water and sewer system; provided the system shall not be subscribed to its capacity and provided the proposed extension design is approved by the city engineer. Any such group requesting an extension shall pay the costs of extending the water main in any manner they shall determine among themselves, but the amount shall be available before installation, or one-third upon beginning of extension installation, one-third when half the extension has been completed and the balance immediately upon completion of the installation. Any such group requesting an extension shall also be responsible for all costs associated with review and assessments by the city engineer. All extensions of water and sewer mains shall become the property of the water and sewer system after installation, inspection and approval by the water and sewer system superintendent and the city manager. 
(c)  Limitations on extensions. In consideration of the contracts of existing subscribers of the water and sewer system, the water and sewer system will not contract for the extension of any of its lines as long as its regular subscribers on the original line as originally constructed consume or are expected to consume the capacity volume of water the water system is efficiently able to furnish, and the volume of sewerage the City can treat or contract for treatment. No extension shall increase the consumption of water to all subscribers including all extensions more than the capacity the water and sewer system is able to furnish. 
(d)  Minimum size of pipe. No major extensions are to be made with less than six-inch diameter approved pipe with the approved minimum number of fire hydrants (every 1,000 feet). Minor extensions may be made with two- or four-inch diameter approved pipe (less than 500 feet) as long as no more than four potential subscribers exist. The final determination between a major and minor extension will be made by the city manager after consulting with the city engineer. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-26) 
Sec. 28-52. - Change in occupancy. 
(a)  Notice of change. When a subscriber shall move from any property for which he has signed a contract with the water and sewer system for service, he shall immediately give written notice that he is moving, before moving, to the water and sewer system and state the date the water and sewer system shall discontinue service and, pay all charges. 
(b)  Responsibility for payment of water already consumed and not paid for. Any subscriber shall be responsible to pay for all water he has consumed through the last reading of his water meter after written notice to the water system that he is moving. 
(c)  Charges for change. Any subscriber who shall transfer from one piece of property served by the water and sewer system to another piece of property served by the water and sewer system shall pay the applicable service fee. (See section 28-47(a) or (b).) 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-27) 
Sec. 28-53. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  Payment date due. Every subscriber shall be required to pay all bills for services by the due date indicated on the billing statement, normally the 15th of each month. A disconnect date will also be published on the monthly statement, any account not paid before the disconnect date published on the monthly statement will be subject to service disruption by means of a locked meter. 
(b)  Penalties for late payments and for cutting off water. When any subscriber fails to pay any bill by the due date established on the billing statement an additional late charge as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council shall be applied, and any subscriber that shall have his water cut off for failure to pay his bill shall pay a reconnection fee for such service caused by his failure prior to resumption of service. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-28) 
Sec. 28-54. - Water ban. 
(a)  The city, from time to time, reserves the right to invoke outdoor water use, restrictions during certain hours and/or days in order to comply with federal, state, county or the city's own mandates during times of emergency, disaster or drought. Each customer may have the right to petition the water and sewer commissioner for special needs in the event of a hardship. Said petition will be presented by the water commissioner herein at the next regularly scheduled council meeting for consideration. If due cause is shown, the city council may issue a variance under whatever terms the city council deems appropriate. 
(b)  Any person who violates the water ban is subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-9, as well the following additional consequences: 
(1)  Written warning for first offense; 
(2)  Locking of meter for 24 hours for second offense ($50.00 reconnection fee); 
(3)  Locking of meter for three days for third offense ($150.00 reconnection fee); 
(4)  Termination of service for fourth offense (reconnection to be approved only by mayor or city manager with a reconnection fee of $500.00). 
(Code 2010, §§ 5-1-29, 5-1-30) 
Sec. 28-55. - Water meters. 
(a)  All connections to the City of Ball Ground Municipal Water System must be metered. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to meter any existing unmetered connection, and to charge the standing prices to install the meter. 
(c)  Users with meters must have their entire water supply to the premises on which they are set, metered, and they will be charged for all water that passes through the meter, whether used or wasted. 
(d)  All master meters installed in the system must be sub-metered by the owner at the point of use for each individual commercial/industrial space or business. 
(e)  Every individual dwelling or unit in a multi-family structure will be individually metered. 
(f)  Connections to a drive-thru car wash will not be established unless the car wash is equipped for water recycle. 
(g)  All water meters will be set on public right-of-way. The city reserves the right to relocate any existing meter on private property to the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 9-14-2017(3) ) 
Secs. 28-56—28-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWERS 

Sec. 28-82. - Dry sewer. 
(a)  The city hereby mandates that any new construction of residential dwellings or commercial structures or the installation of sanitary septic systems to serve existing structures require the installation of a dry sewer connection in accordance with the development specifications as promulgated and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Specifically, the developer of any subdivision or commercial development commenced after the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall construct a sewer system as part of the development so that such development may be connected to the city sewer system. If no such city sewer is in existence at the time of the construction of said development, then a dry sewer shall be installed and capped for eventual connection to the city's sewer system. 
(c)  No conceptual plat for new subdivisions or commercial developments shall be approved by the city or its agents until said plat includes a dry sewer as described above. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-6) 
Sec. 28-83. - Sewer use. 
(a)  All existing businesses, industries and residences within 200 feet of sewer service, which have indoor plumbing facilities, to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, shall connect to and use the central sewer system of the city within 90 days after service shall be available. This division does also require all new construction needing sewer service to utilize said central sewer system. 
(b)  Each residential and commercial subscriber to the sewer system of the city shall pay a connection fee (tapping fee), the rate being established from time to time by the mayor and council. However; this connection fee shall be waived for any residential user establishing sewer service during the first 90 days of the central sewer system becoming operational for service at their location. 
(c)  Failure to connect to the central sewer service within 90 days after service is available shall result in the monthly assessment of a minimum base rate for sewer service as established by separate ordinance. This minimum base rate shall be collected as part of the monthly water bill for the non-complying residence, business, or industry, and shall be subject to the collection policies of the city water and sewer system. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-7) 
Sec. 28-84. - Grease and oil. 
(a)  Purpose. To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into said sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cooking establishment means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Director means the individual appointed by the City of Canton to oversee the City of Canton waste water treatment facility. 
Fats, oils, and greases means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as grease or greases. 
Grease trap or interceptor means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors". 
Minimum design capability means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer. 
Non-cooking establishments means those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments. 
User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Grease interceptor capacity, maintenance, record keeping, and grease removal. 
(1)  Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the director or his designee. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments when they are deemed necessary by the director for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed 250 mg/l as tested according to 40 CFR 136. All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the director or his designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and city inspection. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of its entire contents as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often than every 90 days. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall: 
a.  Facilities that prepare food other than restaurants shall provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the uniform plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a "sludge pocket". Restaurants shall size their interceptor based on the following: 30 seats or less requires a 1,000-gallon baffled tank; 31 to 75 seats will require a 1,500-gallon baffled tank and anything over 76 seats will require 3,000 gallon capacity (two 1,500-gallon baffled tanks, in series). 
b.  Empty contents of the grease interceptor every 90 days. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
c.  Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved. The term "consistent" shall mean any wastewater sample taken from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described in subsection (c)(1) of this section. If an establishment desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the following information: 
1.  Location of city sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building. 
2.  Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site. 
d.  Understand and agree that the use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the city manager of the City of Canton, the county department of environmental health, and the city building inspector. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
e.  Understand and agree that the director reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of such traps. 
(2)  The user shall maintain written records of trap maintenance for a minimum of three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the city and/or the City of Canton at all times. 
(3)  No non-grease laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(d)  Access manholes. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. In addition, if an obstruction of a city sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease from the user in the city's sewer main(s) as determined by the city, the city will take appropriate action against users not in compliance with this division to recover the costs of such repairs, fines, penalties, etc., which may be incurred by the city. 
(Code 2010, § 5-1-8) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
Subpart B of this Code is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development. Subpart A of this Code is a codification of other ordinances. Failure to include an ordinance in subpart B that relates to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. Inclusion of an ordinance in subpart B that does not pertain to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. Inclusion of an ordinance in subpart A that pertains to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. 
Secs. 101-3—101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Historic preservation commission, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24 et seq. 

Sec. 101-23. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Encourage the historic preservation of the city through the establishment of a historic preservation commission and a requirement for the commission to review and comment to the city council on plans of subdivision and certain applications for building permits; 
(2)  Review and comment to the board of zoning appeals on certain applications for variances or special exceptions; 
(3)  Review and comment to the city council on development regulations, development regulation amendments, and applications for re-zoning of property; 
(4)  Review and comment to the city council regarding proposed developments or improvements outside of the corporate boundaries of the city which may have the effect of adversely impacting the city's unique historical assets. The historic preservation commission will serve as the official archival body of the city and a resource and clearinghouse for information regarding historic preservation for the benefit of the city, the city council and the public generally; and 
(5)  Advise the city council on matters relating to maintenance, repair and improvements to property owned by the city. 
(b)  All of the foregoing is intended to safeguard the heritage of the city by encouraging the preservation of the historic nature of the city and the elements of its cultural, social, economic and architectural history; to stabilize and improve property values; to foster civic duty; to strengthen the city's economy; and to promote the preservation and appreciation of the historic nature of the city as a whole and specific sites and structures within the city for the education and welfare of residents of the city, and visitors thereto. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-1) 
Sec. 101-24. - Created. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Historic Preservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.), there is hereby created a city historic preservation commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission". 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-2) 
Sec. 101-25. - Composition; appointment; term of members; vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five members. Each member shall: 
(1)  Possess a demonstrated special interest, specific knowledge, or professional or academic training in such fields as history, architecture, architectural history, planning, archeology, anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban design or related disciplines. One member may also be a member of the city council. 
(2)  Be a resident at a location that possesses a physical address in the city. 
(3)  Be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(4)  Be appointed for a term of three years. 
(b)  Transitional provisions. For the appointment of the first members of the commission after adoption of this article, one member shall be appointed for a one-year term, two members shall be appointed for a two-year term, and two members shall be appointed for a three-year term. As those initial terms expire, all subsequent appointments shall be for three years. 
(c)  Members of the commission are eligible for reappointment. 
(d)  Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(e)  The members of the commission shall service without compensation. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-3) 
State Law reference— Historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24 et seq. 
Sec. 101-26. - Chairman. 
The commission shall elect from among its members a chairman. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each quarter. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-4) 
Sec. 101-27. - Rules and regulations; right to appear and be heard. 
The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper transaction of its business. Any interested person or a person's representative is entitled to appear and, upon request, be heard at any public meeting conducted by the commission. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-6) 
Sec. 101-28. - Duties of the clerk and other city officials in connection with the commission. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be considered the official record keeper for the commission. The commission will furnish the city clerk with copies of meeting minutes, and copies of correspondence generated and received. 
(b)  Any administrative support required by the commission will be addressed to the city manager for assignment. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-7) 
Sec. 101-29. - Failure to act. 
The failure of the commission to either meet or submit a recommendation within established timelines will not delay the action of any request pending before the city council or zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 2010, § 2-7-8) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 103-1. - Sidewalks required. 
All new construction within the city, with the exception of individually developed residential lots outside a platted subdivision, shall require the construction of a five-foot concrete sidewalk along the entire length of road frontage. Sidewalks will be constructed on an adequate compacted base and be a minimum of five inches thick. This requirement may be waived by the city council in areas where sidewalk construction is not practical. 
(Code 2010, § 6-2-61) 
Sec. 103-2. - Underground utilities required. 
(a)  All buildings, including residential, commercial and industrial, constructed within the city after March 1, 2005, must be serviced by underground utilities. This includes, but is not limited to, water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone and cable. 
(b)  In all applications where the utility crosses a public road, said road shall be bored and cased to the back edge of the city right-of-way. Casing shall be of an adequate size to allow for the future removal and replacement of the utility within the case. To the extent possible multiple utilities shall be located within the same casing. 
(c)  A separate bore permit will be required for each bore and must be inspected by the city. The fee for the bore permit shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(d)  The cost of the bore permit and the bore shall be the responsibility of the builder, developer or property owner and shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(e)  Exceptions and variances may be granted by the city council involving public property. 
(Code 2010, § 6-2-71) 
Secs. 103-3—103-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; application of building and fire codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq. 

Sec. 103-23. - Adoption of state minimum building codes. 
The state minimum building codes referenced in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(b)(I)—(9)(b)(VIII) as now or hereafter modified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23 are hereby adopted and made applicable to the city. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-2-1, 6-2-11, 6-2-21, 6-2-31, 6-2-41) 
Sec. 103-24. - Electrical permits and inspections. 
(a)  Before any electrical wiring, devices or equipment are installed, repaired or altered in any building or structure within the city, the person making the installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit therefor. 
(b)  Before any permit for electrical work shall he issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefore shall pay all required permit fees. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person controlling any electrical wiring in or of houses or buildings within the city to allow any electrical current to be turned on or consumed in any building without having first had an inspection thereof made and a certificate of approval thereof being issued. 
(Code 2010, §§ 6-2-13—6-2-15) 
Secs. 103-25—103-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 103-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Primary structure means the main building or structure occupying a specific parcel of land. The primary structure would be that building or structure actually meant to be lived in, or occupied for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Code 2010, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 103-53. - Display required. 
As in many emergency situations, minutes can be the difference between life and death. If addresses are not visible from the road it takes first responders extra time to hunt down the proper home or business, every primary structure within the city limits shall properly affix and display their assigned street number in a manner consistent with this article. 
(Code 2010, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 103-54. - Size, specification and placement of numbers. 
(a)  Numbers shall contrast the background color or be reflective so they are easy to read. Numbers will be a minimum of three inches in height. 
(b)  The street address number must be displayed on the building to the left of the entry door that is most visible from the street in a location that will be clearly visible from the road, day and night. If the numbers are not easily viewed from the road, a mailbox or post at the road will be used to display the address number. 
(c)  When a mailbox is used to display the street number the numbers must be affixed in a way that the number is clearly visible even when the arm is in the down position, and the numbers must be placed perpendicular to the road. For the purpose of this article a mailbox may only be used to display the street number if it is a single mailbox. 
(d)  If a structure is more than 100 feet from the centerline of the road the address will be placed at or near the driveway of the structure and also to the left of the entry door on the building that is most visible from the street as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 2010, § 3-2-1) 
Chapter 105 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as the term "structure." 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the initial floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the national flood insurance program (NFIP). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP) and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management ordinance adopted by a community. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the jurisdiction or local permitting authority to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term "substantial damage" also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term "substantial improvement" does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-2) 
Sec. 105-2. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-7) 
Sec. 105-3. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.1)) 
Sec. 105-4. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.6)) 
Sec. 105-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.2)) 
Sec. 105-6. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of defining and determining areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard, areas of shallow flooding, base flood elevations, floodplains, floodways, future-conditions flood elevations, future-conditions floodplains, potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the county, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.4)) 
Sec. 105-7. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.7)) 
Sec. 105-8. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection (d) of this section; 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the (jurisdiction or local permitting authority) prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the (local permitting authority). Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (e)(2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The city may direct the property owner, at no cost to the city, to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city or local permit issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-4) 
Secs. 105-9—105-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-35. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-1(1.3)) 
Sec. 105-36. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city manager or his designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the city manager or his designee shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources (DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-3(3.4)) 
Sec. 105-37. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Development activity of in excess of one acre or within 200 feet of a state water will require a permit application be submitted to the state EPD on forms provided by their office. Copies of all application will be provided to the city. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor; 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 105-67(b); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 105-66(e); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s); 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to, permits required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city manager or his designee, a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to ensure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(2)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, §§ 10-8-3(3.1—3.3)) 
Sec. 105-38. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals as established by city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by zoning board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city and he zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. A variance shall be issued only when there is a: 
a.  Finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(9)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(10)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
(11)  The city manager or his designee shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the state department of natural resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(12)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city and the zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(13)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city and the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(14)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-6) 
Secs. 105-39—105-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 105-65. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article apply in all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5) 
Sec. 105-66. - General standards. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(c)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(d)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(e)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
(4)  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(5)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(f)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(g)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(h)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(i)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(j)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(k)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding. 
(l)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding. 
(m)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(n)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(o)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(p)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
(1)  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.1)) 
Sec. 105-67. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). New construction that has met all of the requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city manager or his designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(c)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with section 105-66(e) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(d)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection (a) of this section), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(e)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
(1)  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 105-8(c) through (e) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). 
(2)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(3)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 105-66(g). 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.2)) 
Sec. 105-68. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e). Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.3)) 
Sec. 105-69. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the city manager or his designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood-prone enclosures in accordance with section 105-66(e). 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.4)) 
Sec. 105-70. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel in these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 105-66(e); 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.5)) 
Sec. 105-71. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 105-37(b)(2). 
(Ord. of 10-9-2014, § 10-8-5(5.6)) 
Chapter 107 - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 107-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 107-9(a)(1)), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the state EPD required for undertaking any land development activity 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area , or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 107-9(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the state EPD may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-3) 
Sec. 107-2. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the state EPD determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the state EPD by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the state EPD shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the state EPD may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The state EPD or the city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The state EPD may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the state EPD may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the state EPD shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the state EPD has taken one or more of the actions described above, the state EPD or the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-10) 
Sec. 107-3. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-2) 
Sec. 107-4. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 107-1. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  A public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; 
g.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (2)a of this section; 
h.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter; 
i.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures; 
j.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city and the state EPD on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the state EPD to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area; 
k.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(3)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(4)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 107-9(b). 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-4) 
Sec. 107-5. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-6) 
Sec. 107-6. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, may appeal in writing within ten days after the issuance of such decision or order to the zoning administrator of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the zoning board of appeals within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-11) 
Sec. 107-7. - Inspections. 
(a)  The state EPD or the city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the state EPD or the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-9) 
Sec. 107-8. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-8) 
Sec. 107-9. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The top of the bank is often a clearer landmark than the edge of the water or the end of vegetation, particularly on intermittent streams. The land forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this chapter. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the buffer and setback requirements, as described in subsection (a) of this section, may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this chapter, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this chapter prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the zoning board of appeals of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. The zoning board of appeals may only grant a variance up to 25 feet. The state EPD is the variance authority for any work inside the state mandated buffer. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the zoning board of appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this chapter without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the zoning board of appeals. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the chapter would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-5) 
Chapter 109 - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 109-1. - Subdivision regulations incorporated by reference. 
The subdivision regulations of the city, as prepared by the county-municipal planning commission, and as adopted by ordinance of the mayor and council on March 14, 1976, as now or subsequently amended, are hereby incorporated into this Code and made a part hereof as fully as if set out at length herein. A current copy of the subdivision regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2010, § 6-3-1) 
Chapter 111 - WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 111-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to water supply reservoirs or perennial streams within water supply watersheds. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to perennial streams within water supply watersheds and within other setback areas specified in this chapter. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include, but are not limited to, buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, and patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated by a solid blue line on a United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmental owned public drinking water intake. 
Watershed protection map means a map prepared by or for the local jurisdiction which identifies water supply watersheds. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-2) 
Sec. 111-2. - The quality of public drinking water supplies must be ensured. 
Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation, which threaten the storage capacity of reservoirs and impair the quality of public drinking water supplies. Stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediments into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive, and rendering water resources unusable for recreation and other uses. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in potential risks of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. Therefore, land use activities within water supply watersheds must be regulated to ensure that public water supplies remain clean. This chapter establishes standards, consistent with the state department of natural resources' rules for environmental planning criteria for water supply watersheds (Rule 391-3-16-01) to ensure water quality in the watershed system is not compromised by land activities such as grading, septic systems, and accidental release of contaminants. The intent of this chapter is to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, to maintain the yield of water supply watersheds, and to ensure water can be treated to meet federal and state drinking water standards. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-1) 
Sec. 111-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all lands within existing and future large water supply watersheds and their immediate surroundings, as shown on the watershed protection map. This chapter does not apply to watersheds not used for public drinking water. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-4) 
Sec. 111-4. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following land uses and activities are exempted from compliance with this chapter: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the surface mining act. 
(b)  If utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer or setback areas required by this chapter, such utility locations can be exempted from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible; 
(2)  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible; and 
(3)  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(c)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture; and 
(2)  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-5) 
Sec. 111-5. - Adoption by reference of watershed protection map. 
The watershed protection map, as defined by this chapter is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-3) 
Sec. 111-6. - Hazardous materials handling facilities. 
New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, and which will locate in a small water supply watershed or within seven miles upstream of a water supply intake or a water supply reservoir of a large water supply watershed, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and the requirements of any adopted fire prevention code. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-6) 
Sec. 111-7. - Sanitary landfills prohibited. 
The mayor and city council have found after extensive investigation and research that the city relies on the underground aquifer as the major source of drinking water supply. Further, the mayor and council find that the presence of any sanitary landfill within the corporate limits of the city will introduce toxins and other contaminants into the city water supply rendering the underground aquifer unusable for public drinking water supplies. Therefore, sanitary landfills shall not be permitted within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2010, § 10-4-7) 
Sec. 111-8. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
f.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
g.  Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(2)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Code 2010, § 10-10-7) 
Chapter 113 - WETLAND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Code 2010, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 113-2. - Violations. 
(a)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city council. 
(b)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  If the city manager discovers a violation of this chapter that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-6) 
Sec. 113-3. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national wetlands inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 2010, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 113-4. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the city and will be reviewed within 30 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official or designated appointee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official or designated appointee. Decisions of the building official or designated appointee may be appealed to the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-4) 
Secs. 113-5—113-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 113-27. - Amendments. 
These regulations and the national wetlands inventory maps of the city East and West quads may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-9) 
Sec. 113-28. - Relief assessment. 
The county board of tax assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-10) 
Secs. 113-29—113-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND SITE PLANS 

Sec. 113-60. - Site plans. 
Application for a local development permit within the city shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-1) 
Sec. 113-61. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-3) 
Sec. 113-62. - Activities to comply with site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-2) 
Sec. 113-63. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official or designated appointee. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-5) 
Sec. 113-64. - Suspension, revocation. 
The building official or designated appointee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The building official or designated appointee shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-7) 
Sec. 113-65. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court the city councilor or its designee may, within the time specified by the county superior court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Code 2010, § 10-3-8) 
Secs. 113-66—113-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 113-89. - Permit and corps of engineers determination. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the building inspector, using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Code 2010, § 10-2-1) 
Sec. 113-90. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Code 2010, § 10-2-2) 
Sec. 113-91. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Code 2010, § 10-2-3) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the city zoning ordinance adopted on August 12, 2010. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 100. - TITLE, APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 100.0. - Title. 
The title is the 2001 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ball Ground. 
Sec. 100.1. - Applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all present and future land development located within the incorporated area of Ball Ground, Georgia. The requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. This article shall regulate the height, number of stories, and the size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location and use of buildings and other structures: and the use, condition of use or occupancy of land and trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation, agriculture or for any other purpose; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; creating a Board of Zoning Appeals and defining the powers and duties thereof; providing penalties and resolutions and for other purposes. 
Sec. 100.2. - Purpose. 
The purpose shall be to protect the aesthetic values of land and property, public health and the following purposes listed below: 
A.  To protect existing development in the City of Ball Ground. 
B.  To prevent flooding of improved property. 
C.  To prevent overcrowding of schools and other public facilities. 
D.  To achieve such timing, density, and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overloading public infrastructure systems for providing water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, sanitation, police and fire protection, and other public services. 
E.  To achieve such density, distribution and design of land development and use as will protect the traffic movement capabilities of streets within the city and prevent traffic hazards. 
F.  To encourage such distribution of population, land development and use as will facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of public services and facilities. 
G.  To achieve such density, design, and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values and facilitate the provision of adequate housing for every citizen. 
H.  To secure such accessibility, design and density of land development and use as will reduce fire hazards and fire losses. 
I.  To promote the continued and safe operation of general purpose airports within the general vicinity of Ball Ground. 
J.  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Ball Ground. 
K.  To encourage greater efficiency and economy of land development through natural resource conservation. 
L.  To preserve the City's natural beauty and encourage architecturally pleasing development. 
M.  To improve the quality of life through protection of the City's total environment including the prevention of air, visual, water and noise pollution. 
Sec. 100.3. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article. 
Sec. 100.4. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the Mayor and Council. 
Sec. 100.5. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances and validity of prior approvals and actions. 
A.  This is the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ball Ground, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this ordinance. 
B.  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall remain in full force and effect and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall remain in full force and effect and be binding. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against violations thereof and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything contained herein and notwithstanding any zoning classification change, all previous special stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms contained in prior zoning ordinances shall remain in full force and effect and shall not be amended by this document and shall carry forward to any new zoning classification and shall be binding upon said property. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect and shall remain as such special stipulations, conditions, restrictions, agreements and terms, even though the zoning category itself may be changed hereunder. 
Sec. 100.6. - Development projects under construction. 
Nothing in this article shall require any change in the development or proposed use of properties which are legally under construction or for which a development plan or preliminary plat has been approved within 5 years of the effective date of this article and the development of which shall be commenced within one year after the effective date of this article. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
DIVISION 101. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 101.1. - Official Zoning Map. 
A.  The City is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though fully set forth herein. A copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk for inspection and review by the public. 
B.  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the city together with the date of the adoption of this article. 
C.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. 
D.  No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this article. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this article and punishable as provided under this article. 
E.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the City Clerk shall be the final authority. 
Sec. 101.2. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede all previous such maps. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors of omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 101.3. - District designations. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, City of Ball Ground is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown in Table A. 
TABLE 101.1 - CITY OF BALL GROUND ZONING DISTRICTS 

 
Zoning Equivalent to 1969 Ordinance Provisions 

 
DIVISION 102. - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 102.1. - Rules governing interpretation. 
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district shown on said map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline right of way of streets and alleys, land lot lines, militia district lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  Where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on such maps. Split zoned properties shall no longer be permitted, however, those existing on the date of adoption of this article shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use. Property owners may request the City rezone the entire property to one of the existing zonings or subdivide the property along the district boundary provided all lot standards are achieved for each newly created lot. 
C.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this article, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Sec. 102.2. - Uniformity and compliance. 
The regulations set by this article within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and specifically, except as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 102.3. - Compliance with district regulations. 
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 102.4. - Lots reduced below requirements. 
No lot existing at the time of passage of this article shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Lots created after the effective date of this article shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this article. 
Sec. 102.5. - Annexed territory. 
All territory which may hereafter be annexed into the City shall be classified as per the procedures outlined in Division 110 (Amendments). 
Sec. 102.6. - Special land use permit necessary. 
Any person requesting a special exception from those permitted uses listed under any zoning district must comply with those regulations set forth in Division 109 (Board of Zoning Appeals). 
DIVISION 103. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 103.1. - Intent. 
Within the districts established by this article or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist; lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this article was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this article or such amendment. It is the intent of this article to permit these non conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this article that non conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
Sec. 103.2. - Continuance of nonconforming use. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this article, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
A.  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
B.  Reestablished after discontinuance for a continuous period of 3 months (except when government action impedes access to the premises); 
C.  Expanded, extended or enlarged in any manner which increase its nonconformity, but such structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
Sec. 103.3. - Continuance of building occupied by nonconforming use. 
A building occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be retained, except that it shall not be: 
A.  Expanded, extended or enlarged in any manner which increase its nonconformity. 
B.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired if such construction costs would exceed 50% of its replacement cost. 
Sec. 103.4. - Exceptions. 
A.  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, provided such construction costs do not exceed 50% of its replacement cost. 
B.  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this article, only so long as it is used for a single-family residence. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this article, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this article, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this article, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this article. 
DIVISION 104. - DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES [ORDINANCE][2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Please see the ordinance included at the end of this appendix. 

Sec. 104.1. - RE, Residential Estate. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to permit residential development in those areas that are expected to become more nearly urban in character. The areas involved are generally in transition from agricultural areas to residential development and are considered appropriate for low density residential development. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RE district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1)  Single-family dwellings. 
2)  Manufactured dwellings. 
3)  Modular dwellings. 
4)  Local, state, or federal government building. 
5)  Garden, crop growing. 
6)  Publicly owned and operated park or recreation area. 
7)  Kennel provided: 
a)  No animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
8)  Utility substation provided: 
a)  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Structures must be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least 8 feet high with the bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c)  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d)  A natural or planted vegetation buffer providing a minimum of 90% opacity to a minimum height of 8 feet along the side and rear property lines. 
9)  Greenhouses. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator. 
1)  Church, synagogue, chapel, or other place of religious worship provided: 
a)  It must be located on an arterial or collector road. 
b)  The lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
c)  All buildings must be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
d)  A natural or planted vegetation buffer providing a minimum of 90% visual opacity to a minimum height of 8 feet along all side and rear property lines. 
2)  Nursery school or kindergarten provided: 
a)  At least 200 square feet of outdoor play area must be provided. 
b)  At least 35 square feet on indoor space per child must be provided. 
c)  Outdoor play areas must be enclosed by a fence at least 4 feet high. 
3)  Home occupations (see standards set forth in Section 106.3). 
4)  Group homes and halfway houses limited to one (1) bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
5)  School: Elementary, middle, high; public or private. 
6)  Library. 
7)  Ambulance or emergency service. 
8)  Golf course. Public or private provided: 
a)  It must be for daytime use only. 
b)  All buildings, greens and fairways must be set back at least 100 feet from any property line. 
9)  Hospital provided: 
a)  It is located on an arterial or collector road. 
b)  The lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
c)  All buildings must be located at least 50 feet from all property lines. 
10)  Cemetery provided: 
a)  It is located on an arterial or collector road. 
b)  The lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
c)  A natural or planted vegetation buffer providing a minimum of 90% visual opacity to a minimum height of 8 feet all side and rear property lines. 
D.  Accessory structures and uses. 
1)  Private garage or carport not to exceed the storage capacity of 3 automobiles or light duty trucks per dwelling unit. 
2)  Structure for the storage of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its grounds. 
3)  Structure for a children's playhouse and the storage of children's play equipment. 
4)  Structure for the storage of equipment and supplies used for agricultural purposes. 
5)  Private swimming pool provided: 
a)  All such swimming pools must be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least 5 feet high with lock-type security latches. 
6)  Private tennis court provided: 
a)  The court must be surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of 10 feet. 
b)  If lighted, lights must be designed so that no light shall be cast upon adjacent property. 
7)  The parking of one (1) unoccupied travel trailer, motor coach or pleasure boat provided: 
a)  It must be parked behind the line projected from the front façade of the primary residence across the property to the side property lines. 
8)  Guest quarters provided: 
a)  No more than one (1) is permitted on a lot with another dwelling. 
b)  It is permitted only within a rear yard. 
c)  Such a use shall not be used as a rental property. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet high. The Administrator may approve the substitution of vegetative plantings for the required fence or wall. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures. 
F.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 2.0 acres. 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface: 30%. 
Front setback (arterial): 40 feet. 
Front setback (other): 40 feet. 
Side setback: 40 feet. 
Rear setback: 40 feet. 
Accessory structure setback. 
Side setback: 20 feet. 
Rear setback: 20 feet. 
Sec. 104.2. - R-15, Single-family Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to enable residential development of low density single-family detached housing and residentially compatible uses requiring large amounts of open space. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-15 district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2)  Religious institutions. 
3)  Schools, colleges and universities, public and private. Minimum 3-acre lot size. 
4)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b)  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
5)  Private, noncommercial neighborhood recreation facilities and/or swimming pools providing pools are enclosed by a fence of not less than six feet in height. 
6)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. 
1)  Home occupations (See standards set forth in Section 106.3). 
2)  Group homes and halfway houses, limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 5 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50% that of the principal structure. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet in height. The Mayor and/or his/her designee may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures (and therefore subject to the standards for same) that must be screened by fencing or vegetation in such a manner that they may not be seen from the public right-of-way. 
3)  All front, side and rear yards must be sodded. 
4)  All garages (attached or detached) must be of sufficient size to incorporate the minimum 8' x 20' parking stall(s) exclusive of any storage or utility provisions. 
5)  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
F.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width: 75 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 30%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback: 10 ft. 
Rear setback: 25 ft. 
Sec. 104.3. - R-20, Single-family Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to enable residential development of low density single-family detached housing and residentially compatible uses requiring large amounts of open space. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-20 district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2)  Religious institutions. 
3)  Electric transformer station, gas regulator stations, and telephone exchange when necessary to provide service tot he district. 
4)  Schools, colleges and universities, public and private. Minimum 3-acre lot size. 
5)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b)  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
6)  Private, noncommercial neighborhood recreation facilities and/or swimming pools providing pools are enclosed by a fence of not less than six feet in height. 
7)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. 
1)  Home occupations (See standards set forth in section 106.3). 
2)  Group homes and halfway houses, limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 5 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50% that of the principal structure. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet in height. The Mayor and/or his/her designee may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures (and therefore subject to the standards for same) that must be screened by fencing or vegetation in such a manner that they may not be seen from the public right-of-way. 
3)  All front, side and rear yards must be sodded. 
4)  All garages (attached or detached) must be of sufficient size to incorporate the minimum 8' x 20' parking stall(s) exclusive of any storage or utility provisions. 
5)  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
F.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 20,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width: 80 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 30%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback: 10 ft. 
Rear setback: 25 ft. 
Sec. 104.3.1. - R-30, Single-family residential. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to enable residential development of low density single-family detached housing and residentially compatible uses requiring large amounts of open space. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-30 district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2)  Religious institutions. 
3)  Electric transformer station, gas regulator stations, and telephone exchange when necessary to provide service to the district. 
4)  Schools, colleges and universities, public and private. Minimum 3-acre lot size. 
5)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b)  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
6)  Private, noncommercial neighborhood recreation facilities and/or swimming pools providing pools are enclosed by a fence of not less than six feet in height. 
7)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. 
1)  Home occupations (See standards set forth in section 106.3). 
2)  Group homes and halfway houses, limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 5 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right of way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50% that of the principal structure. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self closing self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet in height. The Mayor and/or his/her designee may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures (and therefore subject to the standards for same) that must be screened by fencing or vegetation in such a manner that they may not be seen from the public right-of-way. 
3)  All front, side and rear yards must be sodded. 
4)  All garages (attached or detached) must be of sufficient size to incorporate the minimum 8' x 20' parking stall(s) exclusive of any storage or utility provisions. 
5)  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
F.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 30,000 sq ft. 
Minimum lot width: 100 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 30%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other) 15 ft. 
Side setback: 10 ft. 
Rear setback: 25 ft. 
Sec. 104.4. - R-40, Single-family Residential. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to enable residential development of a low density single-family detached housing and residentially compatible uses requiring large amounts of open space. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-40 district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2)  Forestry. 
3)  Livestock, poultry and non-commercial riding stables, provided: 
a)  No livestock shall be kept on a lot containing less than 3 acres. 
b)  All buildings used for animals shall be set back not less than 75 feet from all property lines. 
c)  All animals shall be maintained at least 50 feet from any property line and shall have 5,000 square feet of fenced lot area not covered by the principal structure for each animal. 
4)  Farming on tracts of five acres or more including the production of trees, field crops, fruits, nuts and vegetables; buildings, equipment, and animals incidental thereto; but excluding the raising of livestock or poultry for commercial products or sale. 
5)  Electric transformer station, gas regulator stations, and telephone exchange when necessary to provide service tot he district. 
6)  Religious institutions 
7)  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided: 
8)  Such use must obtain certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources 
9)  Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
10)  Noncommercial and nonfraternal clubs and lodges 
11)  Full size, private golf courses and club houses 
12)  Schools, colleges and universities, public and private. Minimum 3-acre lot size. 
13)  Bed and Breakfast Inns, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b)  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
13[14])  Private, noncommercial neighborhood recreation facilities and/or swimming pools providing pools are enclosed by a fence of not less than six feet in height. 
14[15])  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. 
1)  Home occupations (See standards set forth in Section 106.3). 
2)  Group homes and halfway houses, limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 5 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the mean height of the principal building. 
5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50% that of the principal structure. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet in height. The Mayor and/or his/her designee may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures (and therefore subject to the standards for same) that must be screened by fencing or vegetation in such a manner that they may not be seen from the public right-of-way. 
3)  All front, side and rear yards must be sodded. 
4)  All garages (attached or detached) must be of sufficient size to incorporate the minimum 8' x 20' parking stall(s) exclusive of any storage or utility provisions. 
5)  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
F.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum Lot Size: 40,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum Lot Width: 130 ft. 
Maximum Building Height: 35 ft. 
Maximum Impervious Surface: 30%. 
Front Setback (Arterial): 30 ft. 
Front Setback (Other): 20 ft. 
Side Setback: 15 ft. 
Rear Setback: 25 ft. 
Sec. 104.5. - RM-4, Single-family Residential—Attached. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The RM-4 district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family attached housing at medium densities. These districts may also serve as transitional zones between light commercial/office uses and districts reserved for lower density single-family uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Duplexes, triplexes and quadplexes. 
2)  Fee simple townhomes. 
3)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
4)  Public buildings and utilities. 
5)  Neighborhood recreation centers or swimming pools, provided: 
a)  Lighting shall be established in such a way that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
b)  Any building or structure established in connection with such use must be set back no less than 75 feet from any property line. 
c)  All pools must adhere to the standards of the Standard Swimming Pool Code, as amended. 
6)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. 
1)  Home occupations (See standards set forth in Section 106.3). 
2)  Group homes and halfway houses, limited to one bed per 250 gross square feet of heated building space. Operator must obtain all necessary state certifications. 
D.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 5 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
3)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building. 
4)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 15 feet or the height of the principal building. 
5)  The area of the accessory building's footprint may not exceed 50% that of the principal structure. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
E.  Use limitations. 
1)  All outside storage must be stored in a side or rear yard and screened from all streets and adjacent properties by a non-opaque fence or wall at least 6 feet in height. The Mayor and/or his/her designee may approve the substitution of plantings for the required fence. Unenclosed carports and front porches may not be used for storing any materials other than firewood or recyclable materials within a city approved container. 
2)  A satellite dish with a diameter of 24 inches and under may be attached to the side or rear of the principal structure and encroach 3 feet into the required setback. Larger satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures (and therefore subject to the standards for same) that must be screened by fencing or vegetation in such a manner that they may not be seen from the public right-of-way. Installation of more than one satellite dish per structure requires prior approval from City. 
3)  Each dwelling unit may contain a maximum of 2 domesticated animals weighing 3 lb. or more. This standard shall not apply to animals less than six months of age. No livestock are permitted. 
4)  Minimum parking provided shall be two spaces per dwelling unit. Such space shall be provided not more than 150 feet from the dwelling unit. 
5)  All front, side and rear yards must be sodded. 
6)  All garages (attached or detached) must be of sufficient size to incorporate the minimum 8' x 20' parking stall(s) exclusive of any storage or utility provisions. 
7)  No off-street parking space shall be utilized to park buses, tractor-trailers (attached or otherwise) or semi-trailer. 
F.  Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 
20,000 sq. ft.—Duplexes and triplexes. 
40,000 sq. ft.—Quadplex. 
10,000 sq. ft.—Fee simple townhomes. 
Maximum density: 4 dwelling units per acre. 
Minimum lot width: 
40 ft.—Townhomes. 
80 ft.—Duplex, triplex, quadplex. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Minimum floor area/unit: 
1,200 sq. ft.—Fee simple townhomes. 
850 sq. ft.—Duplexes, triplexes and quadplexes. 
Maximum lot coverage: 35%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 40%. 
Front setback (arterial): 40 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback (major): 20 ft. (not applicable with common walls). 
Side setback (minor): 20 ft. spacing between buildings (0 ft. for attached units). 
Rear setback: 25 ft. 
G.  Landscape and buffer requirements. When a RM-4 district over two acres in size abuts an "R" district, a 30 foot greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height (finished side to the exterior). 
Sec. 104.6. - NC, Neighborhood Commercial District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The NC district is intended to provide suitable areas for limited retail and personal services serving those neighborhoods in the immediate area. Uses located within this district supply those goods and services which require frequent purchasing with a minimum of customer travel. The scope at which properties are developed within the CN district should reflect their relatively small market areas. This zoning district may serve as a step down from more intense commercial uses to residential uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Automobile service stations. 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines unless otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
2)  Banks and financial institutions. 
3)  Barber and beauty shops. 
4)  Billiards, pool halls and video arcades. 
5)  Carwashes. 
6)  Coin-operated laundries and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
7)  Convenience stores. Such uses may include self-service fuel sales, provided: 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  No automotive repair is allowed. 
8)  Copy centers. 
9)  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided: 
a)  Such use must obtain certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
b)  Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than 4 feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
10)  Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in fast food restaurants. Outdoor dining facilities may encroach into required setbacks only upon approval from the Fire Department, Public Works Department and Planning and Zoning. 
11)  Grocery stores. Limited to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
12)  Neighborhood retail uses with floor areas under 10,000 square feet. Appropriate uses include: 
a)  Book and video stores (non-adult). 
b)  Camera shops. 
c)  Florists. 
d)  Drug stores. 
e)  Gift shops. 
f)  Toy stores. 
g)  Pet grooming and supply shops. 
h)  Jewelry stores. 
i)  Pawn shops. 
j)  Sporting goods and hobbies. 
k)  Apparel stores. 
l)  Beverage shops. 
m)  Other similar and customary uses. 
13)  Parking for vehicles. If such use abuts a single-family residential district, a 5 foot wide landscaped buffer with a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height shall be provided. 
14)  Professional offices with floor areas under 10,000 square feet. 
15)  Religious institutions, provided: 
16)  Shopping centers, neighborhood markets (up to 30,000 square feet in gross floor area). 
a)  No outparcels allowed. 
b)  All businesses and uses within these centers must be permissible within the district in their own right. 
c)  All loading areas shall be located to the rear. 
17)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
18)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator and/or his/her designee. Certain temporary uses such as tent or sidewalk sales may be permitted within this district, provided: 
1)  Written permission of the property owner is obtained. 
2)  Such use does not last longer than 45 days. 
3)  These uses are not located within 25 feet of any public right-of-way. 
4)  Adequate parking, ingress and egress are provided on site. 
5)  A temporary use permit is applied for and approved by the Administrator. 
D.  Special uses permitted by Board of Zoning Appeals. Not applicable in this district. 
E.  Special uses permitted by City Council. Not applicable in this district. 
F.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 10 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  Any accessory building in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards for a principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
4)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building, nor shall it contain a greater floor area than the principal structure. 
5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 15 feet or the height of the principal building. 
6)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
7)  Recycling collection/drop off centers. 
a)  No outside storage allowed. 
b)  Location of container bins must be approved by the Mayor and/or his/her designee. 
G.  Use limitations. All outside storage areas must be located in the rear yard and must be screened by a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
1)  No manufacturing processes are permitted. 
2)  A maximum of 33% of off-street parking may be in the front yard; remaining parking must be within side and/or rear yards. 
3)  Building design and materials may be of the developer's choosing; however, all facades of the building facing a roadway shall be constructed with brick, stone, rock or wood covering. 
H.  Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width: 75 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 70 %. 
Minimum landscaped area: 15%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback: 15 ft. 
Rear setback: 30 ft. 
I.  Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1)  When a property in this district directly abuts a residential district, a 30 ft. greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
2)  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along right-of-ways and within parking lots (as required in section 106.5) may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 33% of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3)  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
J.  Architectural guidelines. 
1)  All building facades, including those facing a roadway, shall be of architectural treatments of glass and brick, stone, architectural block, stucco and wood with combining these finishes both allowed and encouraged. Exterior building materials shall not be concrete masonry units, aluminum siding, vinyl siding or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses & roof screens). 
2)  Areas of 150 linear feet or more of uninterrupted single finishes for all walls visible from the roadway or parking areas shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, false windows, archways, landscaping, storefront, or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings. 
3)  Buildings design shall include a minimum three foot high contrasting base extending along the entire front of the building. 
4)  Building design shall include a minimum one (1) foot deep cornice, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building at least ten (10) feet from the front of the building. 
5)  All ground level windows facing streets shall be clear, unpainted glass to allow view of store interiors and display windows. Mirrored glass with a reflection of greater than twenty percent (20%) and glass curtain walls shall be prohibited. 
6)  Windows shall be raised a minimum of three (3) feet above the floor line. Window design will be in keeping with the architectural design of the building. 
7)  Building entry areas of single business buildings and the principal entry of a multi-business building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
8)  To the extent any rear or side of any building is directly visible from any public street or residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
Sec. 104.7. - CBD, Central Business District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to protect and promote suitable areas for commercial and residential land uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area, and to encourage the development of a centralized business center for the City of Ball Ground. 
B.  Permitted uses. Buildings or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1)  Ambulance services. 
2)  Amusement centers and arcades, including billiards and pool halls. All activities must take place wholly within a permanently enclosed building. 
3)  Automobile service stations. 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
d)  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
4)  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinary clinics. 
a)  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
b)  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
5)  Animal grooming shops. 
6)  Athletic and health clubs. 
7)  Automobile sales. 
a)  Minimum 20,000 square foot lot size. 
b)  All vehicles shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street right of way line. 
c)  When such use abuts residentially zoned properties, a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height shall be provided for visual screening. 
8)  Banks and financial institutions. 
9)  Barber and beauty shops. 
10)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided: 
a)  The facility is operated by the resident-owner. 
b)  The building and lot meet all applicable city and state code regulations, including minimum lot standards. 
c)  A minimum of one parking space per rental room is provided in addition to those required for the resident. 
11)  Car maintenance facilities such as brake repair, installation of tires, tune-up shops, oil change services, emission stations and the like. All activities shall take place within an enclosed building. No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
12)  Clinics and health centers. 
13)  Clubs and lodges, including assembly halls and conference centers. Such use may include office space where incidental to the principal use. 
14)  Coin-operated laundries and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
15)  Convenience stores. Such uses may include self-service fuel sales, provided: 
a)  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
b)  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
c)  No automotive repair is allowed. 
16)  Copy centers and printing, publishing and engraving services. 
17)  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
18)  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources is obtained and any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than 4 feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
19)  Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in fast food restaurants. Outdoor dining facilities may encroach into required setbacks only upon approval from the appropriate city health and safety departments. 
20)  Exterminating facilities. 
21)  Funeral homes. All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
22)  Grocery and food stores. 
23)  Hotels and motels. 
24)  Light assembly. Must be conducted in a wholly enclosed building, involving no outdoor storage of materials, equipment or items which generate noise, odors, or fumes which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which housed. 
25)  Lumber, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores. All outdoor storage shall be screened by a solid or non-opaque fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
26)  Medical and dental facilities and laboratories, provided chemicals are not manufactured on site. 
27)  Movie theaters. 
28)  Non-automotive repair service centers. No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building is permitted. 
29)  Parking lots and garages. Up to 75% of the gross floor area of a parking garage's ground floor level may be devoted to commercial use oriented towards pedestrian traffic. 
30)  Pharmacies and drug stores. 
31)  Professional and general business offices. No outside storage is permitted. 
32)  Public buildings and facilities, not to include storage yards. 
33)  Radio, recording and television studios. 
34)  Religious institutions, including accessory schools. 
35)  Sanitariums, rest and retirement homes, nursing homes, assisted living and personal care facilities. Operator must attain all required state certifications. 
36)  Residential use. Maximum density of four dwelling units per acre. 
37)  Retail sales of food drugs, clothing, sporting goods, hardware, appliances, books, flowers, toys and similar items. 
38)  Retail services such as laundry, dry cleaning, shoe repair, tailor, barber shop and similar services. 
39)  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
C.  Area, yard and height regulations. 
Minimum lot size: Not applicable in this district. 
Minimum lot width: Not applicable in this district. 
Minimum lot depth: Not applicable in this district. 
Maximum building height: 40 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 90%. 
Minimum landscaped area: 5%. 
Front setback: Not applicable in this district. 
Side setback: Not applicable in this district. 
Rear setback: Not applicable in this district. 
D.  Architectural guidelines. 
1)  All building facades, including those facing a roadway, shall be of architectural treatments of glass and brick, stone, architectural block, stucco and wood with combining these finishes both allowed and encouraged. Exterior building materials shall not be concrete masonry units, aluminum siding, vinyl siding or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses & roof screens). 
2)  Areas of 150 linear feet or more of uninterrupted single finishes for all walls visible from the roadway or parking areas shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, false windows, archways, landscaping, storefront, or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings. 
3)  Buildings design shall include a minimum three foot high contrasting base extending along the entire front of the building. 
4)  Building design shall include a minimum one (1) foot-deep cornice, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building at least ten (10) feet from the front of the building. 
5)  All ground level windows facing streets shall be clear, unpainted glass to allow view of store interiors and display windows. Mirrored glass with a reflection of greater than twenty percent (20%) and glass curtain walls shall be prohibited. 
6)  Windows shall be raised a minimum of three (3) feet above the floor line. Window design will be in keeping with the architectural design of the building. 
7)  Building entry areas of single business buildings and the principal entry of a multi-business building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
8)  To the extent any rear or side of any building is directly visible from any public street or residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
Sec. 104.8. - OIT, Office Institution Transitional. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The OIT district is intended to provide protection to the residents of residential areas experiencing transition to other uses, primarily professional offices, by promoting the continued utilization of existing houses, discouraging demolition and permitting office uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, noise or other harmful effects. The OIT district is differentiated from other commercial zonings in that it is designed to facilitate the reuse of existing structures previously utilized for residential purposes in contrast to new developments. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Professional offices. Health practitioners are limited to 1,500 gross square feet. 
2)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
3)  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes. Such use shall adhere to R-15 zoning standards. 
4)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use. 
A.  Special uses permitted by Board of Zoning Appeals. Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
B.  Use limitations. 
1)  Residential facade, architecturally similar to adjacent buildings. 
2)  The parking area shall be located in the rear yard or side yard at least 5 feet from the all property lines. 
3)  Limitation on signs: 
a)  No sign structure shall exceed 32 square feet or 6 feet in height. 
b)  Copy area of the sign is limited to 20 square feet. 
c)  No animated, roof, internally illuminated or flashing/blinking signs. 
d)  Wall signs shall not be permitted higher than 12 feet and are limited to 12 square feet. 
4)  Bulk and area requirements may be waived by the Administrator when an existing structure is converted to OIT use. 
5)  Only existing structures previously utilized for residential purposes may be rezoned to OIT. A commercial certificate of occupancy must be obtained prior to any business license being issued. 
6)  Lighting shall be established so that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
C.  Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width: 50 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum impervious surface: 50%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback: 15 ft. 
Rear setback: 25 ft. 
D.  Landscape and buffer requirements. When a property in this district abuts a property zoned for residential purposes a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height shall be provided and maintained between the use and the residential district. The type of fence must be approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning. Plantings may be approved in lieu of the required fence at the discretion of the Director. In no case shall the screening requirement be waived except when the required screening would be in front of the principal structures upon the subject and adjacent properties. 
Sec. 104.9. - LRO, Low Rise Office. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The LRO district is intended to provide suitable areas for small scale professional offices and other nonretail oriented commercial uses such as offices and day care centers. This district provides a step down from more intense uses and is ideally located between residential zonings and more intense uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Banks and financial institutions, including those with drive-in services and automatic tellers. 
2)  Cultural facilities. 
3)  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided: 
a)  Such use must obtain certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
b)  Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than 4 feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
4)  Health service clinics. 
5)  Offices, professional and general office. Maximum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet. 
6)  Personal care facilities, provided: 
a)  Such use must obtain all necessary local and state licenses. 
b)  The maximum number of beds permitted shall not exceed one per 200 gross square feet. 
7)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
8)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Director. Not applicable in this district. 
D.  Special uses permitted by Board of Zoning Appeals. Group homes (See standards set forth in Section 106.2(B)). 
E.  Special uses permitted by City Council. Not applicable in this district. 
F.  Accessory structures. 
1)  All such structures shall be located upon the same lot and to the side or rear of the principal use at least 10 feet from side or rear lot lines. In cases of corner lots, the accessory structure may not be closer to any right-of-way than the principal building. 
2)  Any accessory building in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space must meet the setback standards for a principal use and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. 
3)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building in any manner, it shall be deemed part of the principal structure and subject to all bulk and area requirements of same. 
4)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot before the principal building, nor shall it contain a greater floor area than the principal structure. 
5)  No accessory structure may exceed the more restrictive of either 15 feet or the height of the principal building. 
6)  Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet in height with a self-closing, self-latching gate and must comply with all applicable safety and health ordinances. 
7)  Heating and air conditioning units may encroach 5 feet into the required rear or side setback. 
G.  Use limitations. 
1)  No outside storage is permitted. 
2)  Commercial vehicles parked on-site may be no larger than a step van. 
3)  No laboratories or clinics are permitted. 
4)  A maximum of 50% of the off-street parking provided may be within the front yard; remaining parking must be in side and/or rear yards. 
5)  Lighting shall be established so that no direct light shall cast over any property line nor adversely affect neighboring properties. 
H.  Bulk and area regulations. 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot width: 60 ft. 
Maximum building height: 35 ft. 
Maximum floor area ratio: 0.50. 
Maximum impervious surface: 75%. 
Minimum landscaped area: 15%. 
Front setback (arterial): 30 ft. 
Front setback (other): 15 ft. 
Side setback: 15 ft. 
Rear setback: 30 ft. 
I.  Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1)  When a property in this district directly abuts a single-family residential district, a 20 ft. greenbelt buffer shall be established. Such buffer must include a solid fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
2)  Landscaped areas must contain appropriate materials such as grass, hedges, trees, natural vegetation and the like. Landscaping along right-of-ways and within parking lots (as required in Section 106.5) may be counted within this figure, however, no more than 25% of the required landscaping provided may be within stormwater retention facilities. 
3)  Stormwater retention facilities are not permitted within required buffers. 
J.  Architectural guidelines. 
1)  All building facades, including those facing a roadway, shall be of architectural treatments of glass and brick, stone, architectural block, stucco and wood with combining these finishes both allowed and encouraged. Exterior building materials shall not be concrete masonry units, aluminum siding, vinyl siding or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses and roof screens). 
2)  Areas of 150 linear feet or more of uninterrupted single finishes for all walls visible from the roadway or parking areas shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, false windows, archways, landscaping, storefront, or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings. 
3)  Buildings design shall include a minimum three foot high contrasting base extending along the entire front of the building. 
4)  Building design shall include a minimum one (1) foot deep cornice, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building at least ten (10) feet from the front of the building. 
5)  All ground level windows facing streets shall be clear, unpainted glass to allow view of store interiors and display windows. Mirrored glass with a reflection of greater than twenty percent (20%) and glass curtain walls shall be prohibited. 
6)  Windows shall be raised a minimum of three (3) feet above the floor line. Window design will be in keeping with the architectural design of the building. 
7)  Building entry areas of single business buildings and the principal entry of a multi-business building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
8)  To the extent any rear or side of any building is directly visible from any public street or residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
Sec. 104.10. - LI, Light Industrial District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The LI district is intended to provide suitable areas for business facilities, certain transportation facilities, and manufacturing/assembly process which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, or odors from an enclosed building. These districts should have access to arterial roadways and utilities and discourage uses which are incompatible with light manufacturing. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the LI district should provide for uses that are low in intensity, and scale to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
2)  Community fairs. 
3)  Farmers markets. 
4)  Administrative offices including contractors' offices. 
5)  Dry cleaning facilities. 
6)  Commercial greenhouse or plant nursery. 
7)  Health service clinics (including accessory pharmacies). 
8)  Assembly halls including union halls, conference centers, fraternal clubs and uses of a similar nature. 
9)  Office service and supply facilities. 
10)  Vocational schools. 
11)  Research laboratories including medical and dental labs. 
12)  Public buildings and utilities. 
13)  Ambulance services. 
14)  Pest control facilities. 
15)  Farm and garden supply stores, including nurseries and greenhouses. Outdoor storage shall be at least 25 feet from City right-of-way. 
16)  Light manufacturing establishments. Maximum lot size of 5 acres and no activities that produce liquid effluent, odor, fumes, or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building. 
17)  Taxi stands and dispatching agencies. 
18)  Funeral homes. All structures hall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zone for residential purposes. 
19)  Newspaper publishing facilities. 
20)  Printing services. 
21)  Radio and television studio facilities. 
22)  Light assembly and fabrication. No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes or dust that can be detected beyond the walls of the building. 
23)  Parking lots and garages. 
24)  Automobile service stations providing; 
i.  All gasoline pumps, tanks and other service facilities shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
ii.  Canopies over fuel islands shall not encroach within 15 feet of any property line. 
iii.  Minor automobile repair shall be allowed in conjunction with such use provided all such activities shall take place within an enclosed building. 
iv.  No outside storage or engine/body dismantling is allowed. 
25)  Trade and distribution facilities, including office showrooms and display areas. 
26)  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
27)  Commercial recreation and entertainment facilities. All activities must talk place in a wholly enclosed building. 
28)  Golf courses, club houses and golf/baseball driving ranges. 
i.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area of 10 feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
ii.  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
iii.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from rear and side property lines. 
29)  Movie theaters. 
30)  Drive-in movie theater. 
i.  The theater screen and all buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from any property line. 
ii.  Central loudspeakers are prohibited. 
iii.  The theater screen shall not be visible from an interstate or arterial roadway. 
31)  Animal hospitals, kennels and veterinary clinics. 
i.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
ii.  All animals shall be located within an enclosed building and adequate sound and odor control shall be maintained. 
32)  Animal grooming shops. All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
33)  Car washes. 
34)  Other uses which are substantially similar in character and impact to those uses enumerated above. Such uses must clearly meet the purpose and intent of this zoning district. 
35)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any legal permitted use, provided: 
i.  Retail sales and services must be conducted and accessed wholly within the building(s) housing the use to which the activities are accessory and comprise no more than 10% of the gross floor area. 
ii.  No window or other advertising shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
C.  Temporary/conditional uses allowed by the Administrator. Not applicable to this district. 
D.  Special uses permitted by Board of Zoning Appeals. Not applicable to this district. 
E.  Special uses permitted by City Council. 
1)  Telecommunications antennas and towers. (See standards set forth in section 106.4.) 
2)  Truck terminals: Minimum 5 acres. All structures shall be located and activities conducted (including parking) at least 300 feet from any property zoned for residential purposes. 
3)  Heavy repair services and trade shops, including sheet metal, upholstering, plumbing, carpentry, sign painting and other similar activities. 
4)  Recycling collection centers. (See standards set forth in Section 105.7.) 
5)  Warehousing, including commercial mini-warehouses. 
6)  Automotive repair shops (including paint and body). 
i.  Such use shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
ii.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
iii.  Such use shall not be established on a lot which is adjacent to or directly across the street from any single-family residential district. 
iv.  All outdoor storage must be to the rear of the principal structure and enclosed by an opaque fence no less than eight feet in height. 
7)  Industrial/warehouse parks. 
8)  Automobile, trailer and boat sales/service. 
F.  All design plans shall be submitted to the Administrator for approval. The minimum architectural standards are: 
1)  All building facades, including those facing a roadway, shall be of architectural treatments of glass and brick, stone, architectural block, stucco and wood with combining these finishes both allowed and encouraged. Exterior building materials shall not be concrete masonry units, aluminum siding, vinyl siding or corrugated steel (exceptions: mechanical penthouses and roof screens). 
2)  Areas of 150 linear feet or more of uninterrupted single finishes for all walls visible from the roadway or parking areas shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, false windows, archways, landscaping, storefront, or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door, or colonnade openings. 
3)  Buildings design shall include a minimum three-foot high contrasting base extending along the entire front of buildings. 
4)  Building design shall include minimum one (1) foot-deep cornices, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings at least ten (10) feet from the front of the building. 
5)  All ground level windows facing streets shall be clear, unpainted glass to allow views of store interiors and display windows. Mirrored glass with a reflection of greater than twenty percent (20%) and glass curtain walls shall be prohibited. 
6)  Windows shall be raised a minimum of three (3) feet above the floor line. Window design will be in keeping with the architectural design of the building. 
7)  Building entry areas of single business buildings and the principal entry of a multi-business building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. 
8)  To the extent any rear or side of any building is directly visible from any public street or residence, architectural treatment shall continue through the rear or side. 
Sec. 104.11. - Ball Ground Highway Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose. This overlay district provides development standards for a uniform landscape and urban design theme. The district incorporates a mixture of uses as an option for all properties in the corridor which meet minimum development requirements. The specific urban design, transportation and land use policies set forth are an extension of the orderly growth policies developed in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
The Ball Ground Highway Overlay District calls for a pattern of buildings constructed in 18th and 19th century architectural styles on a minimum of two acres. The regulations recognize the authentic rural landscape of Ball Ground, the realistic prospects for future development, and the potential for commercial intrusions which may sprawl into established residential areas located near this roadway. The incorporation of extensive buffering techniques seeks to assist in the preservation of such adjoining residential areas by providing a unique transition zone rather than traditional descending density theory. 
The District is intended to generate quality new development along the Hwy 5 thoroughfare while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to aid the public's general welfare. This orderly planning system imparts a distinct aspect of the City of Ball Ground, is intended to attract single-family development, campus style corporate headquarters, discourage sprawl strip commercial development, and provides for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Basic precepts for the District include: 
•  Respect, preservation and use of existing land forms, trees and other landscape themes; 
•  Shielding of parking areas through the dispersion of parking, berms, diffused sight lines and landscaping; 
•  Building with finished front, side and rear elevations; 
•  Respect, preservation and use of vernacular architecture and its elements; and 
•  Creation of a pedestrian environment. 
The zoning of the corridor will be in the form of an "overlay" zoning. Those properties located within the corridor will retain all of the rights conferred by their existing zoning classifications. Moreover, new property rights will be conferred on those properties which meet the criteria established herein. Nothing in this section precludes the filing for a map amendment to any zoning classification allowed by the Zoning Ordinance of the City. However, it is the express legislative intent of the Mayor and Council that strip or single lot commercial development will undermine the objective sought through the adoption and implementation of this overlay district. 
B.  Boundaries. The boundaries of this Overlay Zoning District shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Ball Ground. 
C.  Development regulations for the corridor. 
1)  Streetscape theme. A streetscape theme shall be approved and adopted by the Mayor and Council. Front landscaping areas shall be 40 feet in depth along he entire property frontage except where driveways or other openings may be required. Landscaping shall utilize fences, berms, walls, connecting sidewalks, trees and such other methods to comply with the City's adopted streetscape theme. 
2)  Underground utilities. All on-site utilities shall be located underground. 
3)  Architecture and building materials. Buildings shall be designed to the appearance of 18th and 19th century architectural styles with the exception of single-family residential developments. Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than 20 percent is prohibited. 
4)  Signage. All freestanding signs shall be monument style and shall match the parent building. Specific dimensional requirements for signage shall be as specified in [the] Ball Ground Sign Ordinance. 
5)  Traffic access requirements. Access to Hwy 5 must comply with the traffic access requirements established by the City and Georgia Department of Transportation. Shared use of curb cuts and driveways by adjacent properties is strongly encouraged. 
6)  Parking. A minimum of 2.5 (not to exceed 6) spaces per 1000 square feet of gross building area for all uses shall be provided, with the exception of residential developments which shall provide 2 spaces per dwelling unit. Commercial developments must limit parking within front yard to no more than 50% of total provided. 
7)  Any lot record, as of March 1, 2001, which is subsequently subdivided into a parcel having a smaller area or less than 100 feet of road frontage shall not qualify to be developed under [this ]section 104.11. 
D.  Permitted uses. 
1)  Corporate headquarters and corporate campus developments. 
2)  Churches and their customary related uses, including day care. 
3)  Horticulture and agriculture. 
4)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers and schools. 
5)  Public buildings such as libraries, museums, and art galleries. 
6)  Single-family residential (see R-15 standards). 
7)  Condominiums and townhomes. Maximum density four (4) dwelling units per acre (see RM-4 standards). 
8)  Banks and other financial institutions. 
9)  Business and professional offices, including but not limited to, medical, dental, legal, financial, architectural, engineering, real estate, insurance and manufacturing representatives. 
10)  Service stations provided that all buildings and appurtenances are located at least 400 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
11)  Retail establishments (south of intersection with SR 372 only). 
12)  Restaurants, grill and similar eating and/or drinking establishments. 
13)  Nursery schools, kindergartens and day care centers provided they shall have at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area and at least 35 square feet of indoor play area provided for each child. 
E.  Non-single-family—Small tract development. A non-single-family use on a small tract which is less than two acres in size or has less than 100 feet of road frontage may be developed in accordance to the standards set forth in [this ]section 104.11(D) as follows. 
1)  A petition by the owner or developer must be filed with the Administrator and presented to the Mayor and Council for consideration as a small tract use. The petitioner shall present sufficient evidence to the Mayor and Council to verify that the property is configured in such a manner that it is not feasible to combine the small tract of land with abutting property so as to result in a tract of land two acres or more than 100 feet of road frontage. Upon a finding by the Mayor and Council that the tract cannot be feasibly combined with abutting property; the tract shall receive approval to develop in accord with the standards set forth in this section. 
2)  The adaptive reuse of existing structures may be administratively approved by the Administrator provided no change occurs to the front exterior building elevation, the structure is not expanded beyond an additional 50% of floor area, all vehicle parking is confined to the rear yard and one side yard, the project is developed in accordance with this section, the use of the property is limited to[ this section] 104.11 (D)(1),(2),(3),(4),(5),(6),(7),(8) or (9). 
3)  All small tracts shall provide the required streetscape including landscaping and fencing. Berms shall be given reasonable consideration but shall not be required. 
4)  A minimum 40-foot buffer shall be established adjacent to existing residential uses. 
5)  An area consisting of no less than 15% of the tract size (exclusive of required streetscape area) shall be dedicated to the use of buffers. 
6)  Rear buffers shall be no less than 40 feet. 
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT STANDARDS 

 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT STANDARDS 

 
CITY OF BALL GROUND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 

 
Sec. 104.12. - TND Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for to implement the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan to use traditional "small-town" or neighborhood-type developments for creating attractive living environments within the City of Ball Ground. Specific goals and objectives of the TND Overlay Zoning are: 
1)  To use traditional neighborhood design characteristics for physically recreating the intimate human scale and setting that made "small-town America" a desirable place to live. 
2)  To create compact, identifiable settlements, with visually discernible boundaries. 
3)  To create neighborhoods that are visually coherent. 
4)  To accommodate, in a manner that encourages community interaction and cohesion, a mix of housing densities and types. 
5)  To discourage off-street parking lots; to accommodate parking in a way that does not detract from the neighborhood's visual attributes and works to complement a pedestrian-friendly environment. 
6)  To accommodate, in compatible fashion, appropriate mixes of residential, employment, and commercial uses in close proximity. 
7)  To offer planned, strategically located open spaces to encourage social interaction, recreation, and sensitive areas protection. 
8)  To create attractive living areas that will reduce pressure and demand for sprawl development. 
B.  Effect and applicability of zone. The TND Overlay zoning shall control the form and design of development in lieu of the underlying zoning. The underlying zoning shall control as to general type of land use except those specific land uses prohibited within the TND District as noted within this section. 
C.  Permitted uses. Buildings or premises may be used for the following purposes: 
1)  Single-family detached, single-family attached or multi-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of this section. 
2)  Commercial, to include retail and service, business and professional offices consistent in use and scale with the purpose and goals of the TND zone. No drive-in commercial establishments shall be allowed. Commercial uses are subject to these provisions and may include: 
a)  Animal grooming shops. 
b)  Athletic and health clubs. 
c)  Banks and financial institutions. 
d)  Barber and beauty shops. 
e)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
f)  Clinics and health centers. 
g)  Clubs and lodges, including assembly halls and conference centers. Such use may include office space where incidental to the principal use. 
h)  Coin-operated laundries and dry cleaning pick-up establishments. 
i)  Convenience stores. No automotive services are allowed. 
j)  Copy centers and printing, publishing and engraving services. 
k)  Cultural facilities. Art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters, libraries, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
l)  Day care centers and nursery schools, provided certification from the Georgia Department of Human Resources is obtained any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence no less than 4 feet in height and located in the rear yard area of the principal building with a self-closing, self-latching gate. 
m)  Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in fast food restaurants. Outdoor dining facilities may encroach into required setbacks only upon approval from the appropriate city health and safety departments. 
n)  Grocery and food stores. 
o)  Hotels and motels. 
p)  Light assembly. Must be conducted in a wholly enclosed building, involving no outdoor storage of materials, equipment or items which generate noise, odors, or fumes which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which housed. 
q)  Lumber, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores. All outdoor storage shall be screened by a solid or non-opaque fence or wall no less than six feet in height. 
r)  Medical and dental facilities and laboratories, provided chemicals are not manufactured on site. 
s)  Movie theaters. 
t)  Automotive repair service centers. No activity which produces liquid effluent, odor, fumes, dust or noise which can be detected beyond the walls of the building is permitted. Outdoor storage and parking plans must be approved by the City of Ball Ground. (Changed October 9th, 2014.) 
u)  Parking lots and garages. At least 75% of the gross floor area of a parking garage's ground floor level may be devoted to commercial use oriented towards pedestrian traffic. 
v)  Pharmacies and drug stores. 
w)  Professional and general business offices. No outside storage is permitted. 
x)  Public buildings and facilities, such as a town hall, public parks and village squares but not to include storage yards. 
y)  Radio, recording and television studios. 
z)  Religious institutions, including accessory schools. 
aa)  Retail sales of food drugs, clothing, sporting goods, hardware, appliances, books, flowers, toys and similar items. 
D.  Density. 
1)  Growth areas recommended in the Plan for "low" or "medium" density residential may develop under the TND Zone at a minimum of four units per acre and up to a maximum density of six units per acre. 
2)  Growth areas recommended in the Plan for "high density residential" may develop under the TND Zone at a minimum of six units per acre and up to a maximum density of ten units per acre. 
3)  Maximum permitted densities and total number of dwelling units shall be established during the site-plan review process. 
E.  Supplemental provisions. 
1)  Provisions governing residential land use, lots and buildings. 
a)  Different types of residential dwellings may be mixed on the same block or lot. A residential building may be mixed with a non-residential building on the same block or lot. A residential use may be mixed with non-residential uses in the same building provided the residential use is not on the ground floor. 
b)  A maximum of 60% of the area to be developed shall be low density residential; a minimum of 20% shall be high density residential. Higher densities shall be located to the neighborhood center. 
c)  Building cover shall not exceed 50% of the lot area. 
d)  Multi-family buildings shall not exceed two stories in height. When fronting a street or square, multi-family buildings shall be no less than two stories in height. Single-family buildings shall not exceed three stories in height. 
e)  Multi-family buildings shall be set back 5 to 15 feet from the front lot line. All other residential buildings shall be set back 15 to 25 feet from the front lot line. 
f)  Multi-family buildings shall have no required setbacks from side lot lines; other residential buildings shall be set back the aggregate of 20 feet, all of which may be allocated to one side. 
g)  All residential and accessory buildings, except as otherwise provided, shall have a setback of no less than 20 feet from the rear lot line. Garages accessed through a rear-alley shall have a zero foot setback. 
h)  Setbacks for single-family detached dwellings will consist of a 10 foot front setback, 20 foot rear setback and a 20 foot side setback all of which may be allocated to one side. 
2)  Provisions governing commercial land use, lots and buildings. 
a)  A minimum of 5% and a maximum of 15% of the gross land area, shall be reserved for commercial use. 
b)  At least 25% of the net building area shall be designated for residential use. 
c)  Commercial floor area within a building shall not exceed 7,500 square feet. 
d)  Buildings on commercial lots shall have the facades built within five feet of the frontage line along at least 70% of their length. When such buildings are adjacent to existing development, facades shall be built within a distance of the frontage line that equals the average of five feet and the setback distance of adjacent development. 
e)  Buildings shall not exceed two stories in height. When fronting a street or square, buildings shall be no less than two stories in height. 
f)  Building coverage shall not exceed 70% of the lot area. 
g)  Prohibited uses: Any commercial use which encourages patrons to remain in their automobiles while receiving goods or services, except service stations; chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution as a primary use; enameling, outdoor advertising or billboard as a principal use; moving yards and terminals; prisons; scrap yards; mobile homes; kennels. 
h)  All uses shall be conducted within complete enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. 
i)  Roof pitches and materials shall be consistent with 1890-1930 architecture and material appearance for the North Georgia Area. 
3)  Provisions governing street and transportation. 
a)  A comprehensive pedestrian and bicycle circulation system must link all uses, with the intent of minimizing walking distances and reducing dependence on the private automobile for internal travel and external access. 
b)  All streets shall terminate at other streets within the neighborhood proper. 
c)  Streets shall provide access to all tracts and lots. 
d)  The average perimeter of all blocks within the TND zone shall not exceed 1300 feet; no block shall have a length greater than 500 feet. 
e)  Utilities shall run along alleys wherever possible. 
f)  All residential streets shall have a maximum right of way of 50 feet, 5 foot street tree planting strips and 4 foot sidewalks on both sides of the street. Curb radii s hall be 10 feet. Street tree plantings shall be selected by The City of Ball Ground. In order to vary the appearance and visual impact of the neighborhood, the developer may choose to divide the lanes of traffic and add a 10 foot planted center island in place of the five foot tree planting strips on each side of the street. 
g)  The long axis of the street shall have appropriate termination with either a public monument, specifically designed building façade, or a gateway to the ensuing space. 
h)  Street lights are required. The type and style of street lights shall be approved by the City of Ball Ground before installation. Lights purchased and installed must be eligible for lifetime maintenance through Georgia Power or Amicalola EMC. 
4)  Parking provisions. 
a)  No less that 75% of commercial parking spaces shall be to the rear of the building and shall be screened from the sidewalk by low walls, fences or hedges. The Planning Commission may reduce or waive on-site parking requirements where suitable and adequate parking will be achieved off-site or on-street. 
b)  The developer shall demonstrate the provision of adequate parking and the use of shared parking is strongly encouraged. 
c)  Parking lots and parking garages shall not abut street intersections or occupy lots which terminate a vista. 
d)  All off-street parking for multi-family buildings shall be to the rear of the buildings. 
e)  In the case of low and medium density residential buildings, if off-street parking is provided, it shall be to the rear or side of the buildings. 
f)  Garages shall be accessed from the rear of the dwelling using alleys to the greatest extent possible. When rear entry garages are not feasible, detached garages to the rear of the dwelling may be constructed. No more than 20% of the dwelling units may be constructed with an attached, front entry garage. When this option is used the garage or carport must be located a minimum of 15 feet behind the façade. The Zoning Administrator may grant exceptions when it is clearly demonstrated that due to topography or natural boundaries this requirement is not feasible. 
g)  Parking along the side of residential buildings must be screened. 
h)  There shall be one parking space per 300 square feet of building space for commercial uses, and one room of lodging, and per 2 bedrooms of residential use. 
i)  Parking requirements may be suspended for select retail uses of 2,000 square feet or less, that portion of restaurant setting which is outdoors and adjacent to the street, for daycare, or for other uses which require encouragement. 
5)  Design provisions. 
a)  The neighborhood shall have an identifiable edge. Accordingly, each TND development shall be surrounded by a buffer comprising no less than 25% of the parcel's gross land area, excluding alleys, street and other public ways, and no less than 150 feet wide at any point. This requirement shall not apply in those cases where the use of the TND involves the continuation of expansion of an existing traditional design neighborhood or other traditional design pattern of development. 
b)  A minimum of 5% of the gross area, or two acres, whichever is greater, shall be permanently allocated to squares or parks. 
c)  Each neighborhood shall contain as its central focus, at least one square or park no smaller than 1 acre, and no greater than 3 acres and distributed such that no portion of the TND is further than 1000 feet from a park or square. At least one acre of parks or dedicated green space must be set aside per 40 dwelling units permitted. 
d)  A consistently high quality of architecture shall be used throughout the development. The mass and spatial relationships should emulate traditional villages and local character. 
e)  New buildings shall be of similar design and materials consistent with that found in North Georgia from 1890 thru the 1930s. They shall be compatible in size, scale, mass and roof pitch, with buildings and architectural styles prevalent in the area. The City may require the applicant to involve the services of a certified architect to verify and insure architectural integrity and materials. All materials are subject to review and approval by the City of Ball Ground. 
f)  Building frontages shall face the street whenever possible. 
g)  Front porches are encouraged on all single-family detached homes. All porches shall be linear in appearance and extend along at least 75% of the building frontage. 
h)  The maximum height of walls or fences shall be eight feet. Barbed wire is prohibited. 
i)  Exterior materials shall be natural in appearance, with preference given to wood, wood siding, stone, brick or stucco, or to contemporary materials and details closely replicating such traditional materials. 
j)  Similar land use categories shall generally face across the streets, dissimilar categories may abut at rear lot lines. 
k)  Shade trees and other plant materials shall be provided along street frontages occupied by homes. 
l)  All deciduous trees planted shall not be less than eight feet in height and of three and one-half inch caliper. 
m)  A varied size of homes will be intermixed throughout the development rather than to arrange streets according to home size. 
Sec. 104.13. - AG, General Agriculture District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the district is to maintain the integrity of agricultural activities predominate in the rural areas of Cherokee County contiguous to the City of Ball Ground. The regulations of the district are designed to encourage the maintenance of the general rural characteristics of openness, low density residential use, appropriate agri-business, with some agricultural and livestock production. Such uses shall be maintained until appropriate community services and demand from adjacent built up areas warrant a change compatible with the development plans of the City of Ball Ground. 
B.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the AG district as provided and subject to other applicable requirements of these regulations: 
1.  General agriculture including the production of field crops, fruits, nuts, and vegetables; the personal and commercial raising of livestock providing any new structures housing livestock are setback a minimum of 400 feet from any property line and any related activities defined herein under the terms farming, forestry, gardening and horticulture. 
2.  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries. 
3.  Agricultural oriented businesses such as farm equipment sales, dairies, produce packing, farmers' cooperatives and similar uses. 
4.  Churches. 
5.  Non-commercial clubs and lodges. 
6.  Non-commercial kennels. 
7.  Riding stables subject to the setback requirements of livestock structures specified above. 
8.  Home occupations subject to the following: 
a.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation other than a nonilluminated identification sign having an area of not more than two (2) square feet which shall be attached wholly to the dwelling structure within which such activity is conducted. 
b.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed in such occupation. 
c.  No more than 25% of the dwelling unit may be used for the operation. 
d.  There shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity. 
e.  No commodity shall be stocked or sold on the premises. 
f.  No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and a half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purposes concerning the business or home occupation. 
9.  Campgrounds. 
10.  Public uses and facilities including buildings, structures, and uses of the land by a unit of government such as public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, centers, water, and sewer facilities, administrative buildings, and fire stations, subject to the approval of site plans by the County Board of Commissioners. 
11.  Conventional single-family residences. 
12.  Poultry farms and facilities are not permitted within AG zoned districts. 
13.  The number of livestock located in this zone district is limited to a maximum of one animal per acre. 
C.  Lot size and setback requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 10 acres. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: 250 feet. 
3.  Minimum side setback: 100 feet unless otherwise specified in this division. 
4.  Maximum stories: 3. 
5.  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
Sec. 104.14. - Valley Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Valley Overlay District is to implement the community vision expressed in the Ball Ground Master Plan as adopted by the Ball Ground City Council on December 13, 2007 as prepared by Lew Oliver Inc., Whole Town Solutions dated September 28, 2007 and as subsequently updated or amended. The City envisions the development and redevelopment of this area into a community of choice offering diverse choices and activities for the whole community, with the ultimate goal of creating high quality development that offers a superior quality of life to its residents and business owners. The Valley Overlay District is intended to: 
(1)  Establish and define the physical boundaries of the district. 
(2)  Establish a set of design guidelines that provide site planning, design and building regulations for the future physical development of the corridor. 
(3)  Establish a regulating plan that serves as a framework for regulatory conditions governing the study area to insure development reflects consistent principles of good community design and create an attractive environment encouraging investment in the area. 
(4)  Create a sense of place and a unique identity for the community that reflects the City's desire to be a place of diversity and choice. 
(5)  Create a strong urban structure that reflects sound urban design principles of creating the public realm; hierarchy of streets, open spaces, creating vistas and public and civic spaces, pedestrian friendly environment and high quality architecture. 
(6)  Improve traffic flow and convenient vehicular circulation throughout the area for local traffic via traditional and green friendly means of transportation. 
(7)  Provide transportation alternatives and modes for the residents, good street grids, bike, pedestrian and green street pathways that not only offer alternative ways but encourages walking, biking and electrical cart or vehicle movement. 
(8)  Provide safe and convenient environment for pedestrian movement and access. 
(9)  Encourage diverse lifestyles by promoting mixed use development that offers live/work/play environments 
(10)  Encourage appropriate densities that can support retail, entertainment and commercial activity which creates a successful community. 
(11)  Provide flexibility in housing to support various product types; i.e., condos, live/work units, townhomes and a range of single-family. 
(12)  Provide adequate open spaces and civic/public spaces. 
B.  Boundaries. The Valley District shall apply to all properties within the geographic boundaries as shown in the City of Ball Ground Master Plan. The district is intended to supplement existing zoning regulations. The Valley District plan is shown on page F12 of the City of Ball Ground Master Plan dated September 28, 2007 and is hereby incorporated by reference. The Valley District is further divided into Transect Codes T-3, T-4, T-5 and Civic Functions each with varying permitted uses and standards as further defined in the City of Ball Ground Master Plan. It is intended that each of the aforementioned Transect Codes be considered a zoning classification under the Overlay District. 
C.  Incorporation by reference. The Valley District incorporates by reference, in its entirety, the City of Ball Ground Master Plan dated September 28, 2007 and adopted by the Ball Ground City Council on December 13, 2007 with the following stipulations and modifications: 
1)  Lot sizes within a district may be mixed as permitted in the district but an overall yield shall not be allowed to exceed 10 units per acre. 
2)  As specified in the plan, each dwelling may be permitted to have an ancillary unit for use as a rental apartment - provided that the primary structure shall be owner occupied and not also rental property. Furthermore, that the ancillary unit shall not be counted against the maximum of 10 dwelling units per acre. 
3)  The requirement as published in the plan for a small playground not more than one eighth of a mile from each residence is increased to one quarter mile. 
4)  Division[Section] 104.12 (TND Overlay District) Item C. Permitted Uses, is hereby incorporated by reference. 
D.  District conditions. 
1)  The development of property within the Valley Overlay District shall comply with the minimum standards set forth herein. 
2)  Any non-residential structure that is built prior to the adoption of this ordinance will not have to adhere to the design guidelines set for within this document. 
3)  Whenever the requirements of the District impose a more or less restrictive standard than the provisions of any other statute or covenant, the requirements of the District shall govern, unless in the view of the administrator the enforcement of the more restrictive standard of another statute is more compatible with the vision of the plan. 
4)  The design guidelines of this document shall not change any of the existing zoning for the lands that lie within the boundaries of this overlay district. 
5)  At no time shall the District regulations preclude a property owner's ability to seek a change in zoning of their property within the district. 
E.  Development alternatives. 
1)  Property within the district boundaries may be developed per a plan approved by the City of Ball Ground Executive Committee without the need to seek a change in zoning. The plan must comply with all requirements of the City of Ball Ground Comprehensive Development Code and the City of Ball Ground Master Plan. 
2)  Alternatively, if the property owner chooses to develop the property under the existing zoning, only the minimum standards must be adhered to in conjunction with the requirements of the Comprehensive Development Code for the appropriate zoning classification. Compliance shall be demonstrated through an approved development plan. 
3)  A property owner who desires to develop under the terms and conditions of the overlay district, but desires to use his/her property under a different Transect Code that is shown on the master plan may apply for a map amendment. The decision on map amendments will be made by the Ball Ground City Council. 
F.  Minimum standards. 
1)  Permitted and prohibited uses. As previously identified and incorporated by reference. 
2)  Street network: The street network to include green streets as identified in the Master Plan shall be constructed as shown unless a viable alternative in location is presented and approved. 
3)  Architectural controls. The architectural styles as published in the City of Ball Ground Master Plan dated September 28, 2007 and adopted by the Ball Ground City Council on December 13, 2007 shall be adhered to while using exterior materials that are natural in appearance, with preference given to wood, wood siding, stone, brick or stucco or to contemporary materials and details closely replicating such traditional materials. Variations of the styles of architecture published in the master plan must be approved by the Ball Ground City Council. 
DIVISION 105. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 105.1. - Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot. 
In all districts other than CBD, no more than one structure housing a permitted principal use may be erected on a single lot unless the Administrator has certified that all lot standards of the zoning district are met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. The following uses are exempted from this requirement: 
A)  Institutional buildings. 
B)  Public buildings. 
C)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
D)  Commercial buildings. 
E)  Homes for the aged. 
Sec. 105.2. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings and trailers shall not be allowed in any district except when utilized for construction site contracting work. Requests to utilize a temporary building pending completion of a permanent building may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals for a period not to exceed one year. Utility hookups to temporary buildings must be screened from view through fencing or landscaping subject to the discretion of the Administrator. Temporary structures associated with seasonal sales at an individual lot may be approved by the Administrator once per calendar year for a period no longer than 45 consecutive days, subject to concurrence by the Fire Marshall and Public Works Director. 
Sec. 105.3. - Requirements for moving a building. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the City unless it is first approved by the Administrator who shall verify that it meets all the zoning standards of the district in which the structure will be located. The Administrator shall represent the City in all manners pertaining to the actual relocation of the structure. 
Sec. 105.4. - Fences and walls. 
In all cases the finished side shall be to the exterior. 
A.  No fence or free standing wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than 8 feet in height, or be constructed within 2 feet of a public right of way. Fences located within the established front setback of residential property shall not exceed 4 feet in height. When this article requires a fence to be constructed, such fence shall be completed prior to occupancy of the primary use structure. 
B.  A fence equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes, or similar device, or electric charge shall not contain said devices within 6 feet of the ground level. 
C.  All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence having a height of not less than 5 feet with a self closing, self latching gate unless otherwise approved by the Administrator. 
Sec. 105.5. - Buffers. 
Buffer areas required by this article shall be established and maintained by the property owner and must: 
A.  Be landscaped and maintained as a planted area with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks, and other landscaping materials. 
B.  Not be used for parking or contain any structure other than a fence or drainage improvement required by the City. Access through a buffer is allowed provided it is perpendicular to the buffer only and is designed so as to cause the least amount of intrusion possible. Bike paths and greenways are excluded from these restrictions. 
C.  Utilize and preserve the natural topography and growth of the land except that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth where too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased or dangerous vegetation. Up to 20% of the required buffer may be cleared for utilization as a slope easement where required to prevent soil erosion subject to the approval of the Administrator who shall determine the minimum area necessary for said easement and the replanting schedule to be followed upon completion of the improvements. 
D.  Consist of a permanent wall or solid fence not less than six feet in height and a screen of evergreen plantings, so designed and developed to provide for visual screening and the diffusion of sound. All required fencing shall be installed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. See [section ]106.5 (Tree protection and Landscaping) for a listing of additional requirements pertaining to species and location requirements. 
E.  Any grading, improvements or construction adjacent thereto shall be conducted far enough from the buffer area so as not to disturb or encroach upon the buffer area. 
F.  Buffer area shall be counted in addition to the setback requirement. 
G.  Buffers need not be established in those instances in which a street separates zoning districts. 
Sec. 105.6. - Fire safety requirements. 
Accessibility for fire equipment on hard surfaced sub base (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone) shall be maintained through all stages of construction from the time framing begins. Minimum width of private access driveways within a development, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet and the minimum turning radius shall be 35 feet. Fire hydrants and water service shall be installed to within 300 feet of units under construction before proceeding with framing. 
Sec. 105.7. - Storage. 
Exterior storage yards (excluding vehicles for sale or lease) shall not be permitted in any districts except CD and LI. Exterior storage yards shall be enclosed by an opaque fence not less than 6 feet in height (except where otherwise stated and approved by the administrator) to provide visual screening. Such use shall not be located along an arterial roadway and is subject to the following: 
A.  The regulations of the applicable zoning district. 
B.  No open storage of wrecked or non-operative automobiles and trucks. 
C.  No parts or waste materials shall be stored outside any building. 
Sec. 105.8. - Bulk sanitation containers. 
Bulk sanitation containers shall not be located within a detached single-family district. They are limited to rear or side yards and must be located in such a manner as to be screened from view from the public right of way. No bulk container shall be located within 50 feet of a structure utilized for detached single-family residential purposes. The Administrator may provide for an exemption from this requirement when conditions cannot be met. In such cases, the property owner or tenant may submit a plan for the Administrator's approval. Such plan may include provision for an alternative container utilizing appropriate screening such as a nontransparent fence not less than 6 feet in height with a gate which will open in full to allow service. 
Sec. 105.9. - Substandard lots of record. 
No substandard lot of record may be developed without approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals or, if applicable, permission of the Administrator. 
Sec. 105.10. - Density calculations. 
Residential density standards determining the number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land shall be calculated from all the land within the boundaries of the area excluding floodplain areas and standing bodies of water. 
Sec. 105.11. - Height requirements exceptions. 
In all but single-family residential districts, height limitations stated in this article shall not apply to: 
A.  Farm structures, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, chimneys and smokestacks; 
B.  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks and heating and air conditioning units, provided that such structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which such structures are located. 
Sec. 105.12. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots which adjoin two or more public streets shall provide the required front setback along that street upon which the structure faces provided said frontage's length is at least 75% that of the longest frontage. The side setback shall be the greater of 20 feet or that required by the zoning district on all other street frontages not deemed the front setback. All corner visibility regulations shall be met. 
Sec. 105.13. - Double frontage lots. 
Lots which adjoin a public street in the front and rear shall provide the minimum required front yard on each street, except where such lot adjoins a limited access facility which provides no access to the lot. 
Sec. 105.14. - Projections into yards. 
A.  An open unenclosed porch or hard surfaced terrace, steps, stoops, and similar fixtures of a building may project into a required setback no more than 10 feet. 
B.  Fences, walls and hedges over 3 feet in height may not be established within 15 feet of a right of way intersection unless approved by the Public Works Director. In residential districts fences in front yards are restricted to 4 feet in height. 
Sec. 105.15. - Junk vehicles and yards. 
A.  No junk vehicles, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be parked or stand on any property within the corporate limits of Ball Ground unless: 
1)  It shall be in a completely enclosed building; a vehicle owned by a property owner shall be placed where it is not visible from adjoining property; 
2)  It shall be on property zoned LI with a land use permit for the operation of an automobile wrecking business or junk yard; 
3)  It shall be on property occupied and used for the repair, remodeling or reconditioning of vehicles in accordance with other zoning regulations. 
B.  Any junk yard operated or maintained within Ball Ground including automobile junk yards, shall be screened from public view by a solid wall, planted screen, or similar opaque partition which shall be no less than 6 feet in height. Such screening shall comply in all aspects with all applicable zoning regulations including setbacks. 
DIVISION 106. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 106.1. - Special land use permits. 
A.  Within each zoning district's standards, certain property uses may be allowed provided they obtain a Special Land Use Permit (SLUP) from the Board of Zoning Appeals. This additional review is necessary due to the increased possibility that such uses may have a negative impact on surrounding properties and their value. The City retains its right to subject certain uses to greater scrutiny to determine if they are appropriate or if additional safeguards may mitigate potentially harmful effects on neighboring properties. Table 106-1 below denotes those uses which are permitted only after issuance of a Special Land Use Permit and applicable zoning districts. 
TABLE 106.1 - SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS 

 
B.  All applications for Special Land Use Permits heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for variances and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner. 
C.  The Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a Special Land Use Permit: 
1)  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located. 
2)  Whether or not the use is compatible with the neighborhood. 
3)  Whether or not the proposed use will constitute a nuisance as defined by state law. 
4)  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
5)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
6)  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
7)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
8)  The location or proximity of other similar uses (whether conforming or nonconforming). 
9)  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed upon commercial deliveries. 
10)  Whether or not adequate landscaping plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition. 
11)  Whether or not the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neighborhoods will be adversely affected. 
Sec. 106.2. - Community residences. 
A.  Intent and purpose. The Fair Housing Amendment Act (1988) states that local zoning regulations may not prohibit community residences and requires that municipalities provide "reasonable accommodation" of such uses. The City of Ball Ground regulates community residences using criteria based upon the actual use of the facility and the number of individuals utilizing its services. This provides individuals with opportunities for normalization instead of institutionalization thereby reducing social costs and fostering personal growth and responsibility while also allowing the City to maintain viable neighborhoods based primarily upon similar single-family or planned multi family dwellings. 
B.  Group homes. Group homes are defined throughout the entirety of this ordinance as dwellings shared by non-related individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. This use shall also apply to homes for the handicapped; however, the term "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or alcohol, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing serving as an alternative to incarceration. 
1)  Group homes with six or fewer residents, inclusive of resident staff, are permitted uses within the RE, R-15, R-30, R-40, and TND, zoning districts, provided: 
a)  The structure meets all aspects of the Standard Housing Code including minimum dwelling space requirements. 
b)  The operator of the group home obtains certification from the appropriate state licensing body. 
c)  No other such facility or halfway house is located within 1,000 feet as measured from property line to property line. 
2)  Group homes with more than six residents, inclusive of resident staff, may be permitted within the RE, R-15, R-30, R-40, and TND zoning districts only if granted a Special Land Use Permit (SLUP) after a public hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
3)  Group homes are considered permitted uses by right in OIT zoning districts, subject to those standards set forth therein. 
Sec. 106.3. - Home occupations. 
A.  Intent and purpose. Certain occupational uses termed "home occupations" are allowed in dwelling units on the basis that such uses are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence. They have special regulations that apply to ensure that home occupations will not be a detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding neighborhood. The regulations ensure that the accessory home occupation remains subordinate to the residential use and the residential viability of the dwelling is maintained. The regulations recognize that many types of jobs can be done in a home with little or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood and, as such, may be permitted provided such uses: 
1)  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
2)  Are conducted within the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner; 
3)  Are compatible with residential uses; 
4)  Are limited in extent and do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
B.  Definition of accessory home occupations. Home occupations residents use their home as a place of work, home office or business mailing address. Employees or customers are prohibited from coming to the site. Examples include artists, crafts people, writers and consultants. 
C.  General provisions and prohibited uses. All home occupations shall meet the following: 
1)  A home occupation shall be incidental and accessory to the use of a dwelling as a residence. No more than 25% of the floor space of the dwelling unit (including attached garages) may be used for the occupation. 
2)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation or alteration of the residence and/or accessory buildings to accommodate the home occupation. Internal or external changes which will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting. Any alteration or addition which expands the floor area of the principal structure dedicated to the home occupation use shall void the existing business license and require a new business license be obtained, subject to property compliance verification by the Administrator. There shall be no outside operations or exterior storage of inventory or materials to be used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
3)  Off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the home occupation nor park their personal vehicles at the location. 
4)  No article, product or service used or sold in connection with such activity shall be other than those normally found on the premises. 
5)  No more than one vehicle associated with the home occupation may be parked at the site. Such vehicle is limited to 1½-ton carrying capacity and must be used exclusively by the resident and parked on a valid improved surface. 
6)  No use or activity may create noise, dust, glare, vibration, smoke, smell, electrical interference or any fire hazard. 
7)  All home occupations shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Administrator. 
8)  Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to automobiles and their parts is prohibited. 
9)  Group instruction, assembly or activity shall be limited to five persons at one time (day care excluded). 
10)  Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations. 
11)  The Administrator must approve all business licenses which shall be recertified annually. 
12)  No clients, non-resident employees or customers are allowed on the premises. 
13)  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles which have no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. 
14)  No advertisement shall be placed in any media (including flyers soliciting business) containing the address of the property. 
15)  Family day care facilities must be certified by Georgia Department of Human Resources prior to the issuance of a business license and must accompany all applications for a Special Land Use Permit. The number of children allowed by this ordinance shall be calculated at one child per 250 gross square feet of the residence with a maximum of eight (excluding those of the proprietor). 
16)  Each home occupation is permitted signage according to the following criteria: 
a)  Sign shall be an attached wall sign limited to 6 square feet; 
b)  Signs may not be illuminated in any fashion; 
c)  All signs shall be permitted. 
Sec. 106.4. - Telecommunication towers and infrastructure. 
Towers may be permitted in any NC, CBD, HO and LI zoning districts pursuant to those additional restrictions listed herein. 
A.  General requirements. 
1)  A Special Land Use Permit granted by Board of Zoning Appeals shall be required for the construction of all new communications towers within the City limits after the following factors are considered: 
a)  The proposed height of the tower; 
b)  Proximity to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d)  Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
e)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics which have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
2)  All permit applications submitted to the Administrator shall include a complete inventory of the applicant's existing towers and receivers/transmitters located within Cherokee County including each asset's location, height and co-location usage or capabilities so that the City may promote co-location alternatives for other applicants. 
3)  All applicants must demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna(s). Evidence of an engineering nature shall be documented by the submission of a certification by a qualified engineer. Such evidence may consist of the following: 
a)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b)  No existing structure has sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c)  No existing tower or structure has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. 
d)  Applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing tower or structure. 
e)  The fees or costs required to share the existing tower or structure or to adapt the existing tower or structure for shared use are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. 
f)  Such other limiting factor(s) as may be demonstrated by the applicant. 
4)  At the time of filing the application for a tower, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding tower location, accessory structures, neighboring uses and proposed landscaping. Documentation must be submitted and certified by a qualified engineer delineating coverage and propagation zones, tower design and co-location capabilities. 
5)  In granting a Special Land Use Permit, the Board may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to minimize adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
B.  Standards. 
1)  All towers must be set back a distance of twice (x2) the full height of the tower from any residentially zoned property or structure used for residential purposes. 
2)  All towers shall be separated from each other by a distance of at least 1000 feet. 
3)  All new self-supporting towers which do not incorporate approved alternative design features must be designed and built in a manner that allows at least two other entities to co-locate on the structure. 
4)  All towers and their related structures shall maximize the use of building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Towers shall be painted so as to reduce their visual obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
5)  Any tower which directly abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50' landscaped buffer with a solid fence or wall no less than 8 feet in height. 
6)  All landscaping plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect. For each 30 linear feet of perimeter fencing, no less than 2 trees and 2 shrubs shall be installed. The remainder of the property shall be landscaped in accordance with City standards (see standards set forth in Section 106.5). 
7)  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than 8 feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that such requirements may be waived for alternative design mounting structures. 
8)  All towers shall be monopole designed except those located in LI districts that are greater than 150 feet in height. 
9)  All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and FAA. 
10)  Subsequent to ZBA approval but prior to the issuance of any building permits, compliance with Section 106 of the Natural Historic Preservation Act, shall be demonstrated. 
11)  Tower heights shall be measured from the existing ground base level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna, in accordance with Table 106-2. 
TABLE 106-2 - MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION  TOWER HEIGHTS 

 
C.  Administrative approval. 
1)  The addition of transmitting and/or receiving whip antennas and panels may be approved administratively by the Administrator, so long as any such addition does not add more than 10 feet in height to an existing structure greater than 50 feet in height or more than 5 feet in height to an existing structure less than 50 feet in height but greater than 20 feet in height and all necessary building permits are obtained. Such acceptable structures include buildings, signs, light poles, water towers, and other free standing nonresidential structures. Antennas attached to existing structures, along with supporting electrical and mechanical equipment, shall be of a color identical to, or closely compatible with, that of the supporting structure. Notification shall be given to City Council at least 10 days prior to the granting of said request, and if no objection is lodged, considered valid. 
2)  The Administrator may administratively approve alternative mounting structures such as fake trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light standards, and similar alternative mounting structures, provided such alternative structure is determined by the Administrator to satisfy such factors set forth in subsection A[ of this section]. These structures shall also be exempt from the additional separation and setback requirements pertaining to towers. Notification shall be given to City Council at least 10 days prior to the granting of said request, and if no objection is lodged, considered valid. 
3)  The Administrator may administratively approve the shared use of an existing tower or structure by another provider, including the placement of additional accessory buildings or other supporting equipment. The Administrator may waive district setback requirements by up to 50% to accommodate the placement of such additional buildings or other supporting equipment in order to encourage the shared use of existing infrastructure. 
4)  The addition of antennas to an existing structure are exempted from all setback requirements which pertain to residentially zoned or used properties. 
D.  Removal of antennas and/or towers. All towers shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such towers. If upon inspection such tower is determined not to comply with the code standards and to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance. The owner of the tower may appeal the determination by filing a written appeal to the Mayor and Council within 10 days of the receipt of the notice of non-compliance by the owner. The Mayor and Council shall hold a hearing within 5 days of receiving said written appeal. In the event such tower is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the City may petition the municipal court for an order removing such antenna and/or tower and may petition the court for a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. 
E.  Exceptions. 
1)  Antennas or towers located on publicly owned property or owned by governmental bodies shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the appropriate governing body. 
2)  A tower under seventy (70) feet in height owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempted from these requirements. However, the owner or operator of such tower shall be required to comply with all applicable local, state and federal codes. 
3)  Any existing or previously approved tower or antenna shall be considered "grandfathered" and will not be required to meet any additional requirements of this ordinance other than those in place prior. 
Sec. 106.5. - Tree protection and landscaping. 
A.  Intent and purpose. The purpose of these standards is to facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees as part of the land development process within the municipal boundaries of the City of Ball Ground. Benefits derived from tree protection and replanting include: improved control of soil erosion, moderation of storm water runoff and improved water quality, interception of airborne particulate matter and the reduction of some air pollutants, enhanced habitat for desirable wildlife, reduction of noise and glare, climate moderation, increased property values and aesthetic/scenic amenities. 
B.  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all property utilized for commercial uses, industrial uses and/or parking lots in the City now and in the future and to all property on which renovations to an existing building are greater than 51 percent of the building's appraised value as shown on the current tax records. In accordance with City of Ball Ground Development Regulations, all plats (preliminary and final) and subdivision improvement plans must contain a tree protection plan which meets the standards set forth in this section. Exempt from these standards are: 
1)  Any singular residential lot occupied by not more than one dwelling structure containing (in aggregate) not more than two dwelling units. 
2)  The plantings of public and private plant nurseries, tree farms or botanical gardens which are for sale to the general public. 
3)  Any property undergoing renovation or for which an application for a building permit for renovation has been submitted to the City prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
4)  Any property zoned Central Business District. 
C.  Definitions. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area, or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a building may be located. 
Buffer: A natural undisturbed portion of a lot which is set aside to achieve a visual and noise barrier between land uses. A buffer is achieved with natural vegetation, except for approved access and utility crossings, and must be replanted when sparsely vegetated subject to the approval of the Administrator. 
Caliper: American Association of Nurseryman standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken 6 inches above the ground for up to and including 4 inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Crown dripline: The vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips down to the ground containing the tree's critical root zone (see Figure A). 
DBH: Diameter-at-breast-height is a standard measure of tree size and is a tree trunk diameter measured 4 ½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4 ½ feet, then the trunk is measured at the point directly beneath the split. 
EDF: Existing Density Factor (EDF) is the density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. The EDF is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units. 
Land disturbance permit: An official authorization issued by the Department of Public Works, allowing defoliation or alteration of the site, or the commencement of any land disturbing activities. 
Protected zone: All lands that fall outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as landscaping strips and/or buffers according to provisions of the City of Ball Ground Tree Protection Ordinance. 
RDF: Replacement Density Factor (RDF) is the density of new trees necessary to meet the minimum Site Density Factor. 
Revegetation: The replacement of trees or landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas. 
SDF: Site Density Factor (SDF) is the minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site. 
Specimen tree: Any tree which has a diameter breast height of forty-two (42) inches or larger [see Subsection (D)(4)(d) of this section]. 
Tree: Any self-supporting woody plant, usually having a single woody trunk and a potential DBH of at least two inches. 
Tree density factor: A unit of measurement used to prescribe and calculate required tree coverage on a site. Unit measurements are based upon tree size and are not equal to individual tree counts. 
D.  Tree preservation and replacement. A tree protection and landscaping plan shall be submitted with all other permit drawings as part of the building permit process on any non-exempt parcel of land. Land disturbing activity includes any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, excluding agricultural practices. The intent of these standards is to provide the necessary information to facilitate development project design, plan review, and enforcement processes in order that the provisions of the ordinance are administered in the most effective manner. 
1)  No land disturbance permit shall be issued for projects/lots until the landscaping plan has been reviewed and approved by the Administrator. All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to land disturbance and no land disturbance permit shall be issued for full site development without it being determined that the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of these regulations. This tree preservation plan may either be a separate drawing or part of the overall landscape plan and shall include the following information: 
a)  The name of the project. 
b)  The name of the owner and/or developer, including 24 hour contact. 
c)  The location of proposed building(s) and corresponding dimensions. 
d)  Spatial limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
e)  All required undisturbed buffers, landscape strips and parking islands. 
f)  The location of all specimen trees or stands of specimen trees. 
g)  The location of all hardwood trees with a DBH > 8" and softwoods with a DBH > 12". 
h)  Areas of tree protection and revegetation and all relevant tree density calculations. 
i)  The specific name and location of all materials to be planted or maintained on the site. 
j)  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation and maintenance of tree protection measures including, but not limited to, detail drawings of protective tree fencing (both active and passive) including signage and erosion control measures. 
k)  Planting and staking specifications. 
2)  Grading for future site development shall be considered and regulated as timbering and mining unless site development plans are submitted and approved as per City platting regulations. Applications for tree cutting, clearing or clearing and grubbing shall be in accordance with current land disturbance permit plan review procedures and shall meet the following standards: 
a)  The exterior boundary of the site shall have an undisturbed 50 foot buffer area. This buffer area shall remain undisturbed except for improved perpendicular access points, which may be no wider than 24 feet. Sites over 2 acres in size must retain a minimum of 50% of those trees with a DBH greater than 6 inches (inclusive of the required buffer). 
b)  Submitted plans shall include the following information: 
1)  Owner's name and address. 
2)  Closed property boundary showing bearing and distances of all property lines. 
3)  Limits of land disturbance activity. 
4)  24 hour emergency contact name and phone number. 
5)  Location of and detail for the truck exit (crushed stone pad). 
6)  Delineation and labeling of all required buffer zones. 
7)  Documentation of all existing trees with a DBH > 6". 
c)  All timber harvesting activities shall be in accordance with the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404 and Recommended Best Management Practices for Forestry in Georgia. 
3)  In the event that any tree on any nonexempt parcel of land shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, the tree may be removed upon the written authorization of the Administrator. 
4)  The Site Density Factor (SDF) is the minimum tree density required to be maintained on a developed site based upon the total site area (see Table 106-3). This density requirement must be achieved whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The required unit density may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. 
TABLE 106-3 - MINIMUM TREE DENSITY CALCULATIONS 

 
a)  Existing Density Factor (EDF) is the density of existing trees to be preserved on a site. The EDF is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees to density factor units using Table 106-4. 
TABLE 106-4 - DENSITY CREDIT FOR EXISTING TREES 

 
b)  Replacement Density Factor (RDF) is the density of new trees to be planted on a site. Calculate the RDF by subtracting the EDF from the SDF. The density factor credit for each caliper size of replacement (new) trees is shown in Table 106-5. Any number or combination of transplantable size trees can be used so long as their total density factor units will equal or exceed the RDF. 
TABLE 106-5 - DENSITY CREDIT FOR PLANTED TREES 

 
c)  For additions to existing projects, the tree density requirements are calculated as noted above for only those areas in which new land disturbance is taking place. 
Ex: Sample tree density calculation: 
(1)  A 2.2 acre site has a Site Density Factor (SDF) of 2.2 x 20 = 44. 
(2)  The Existing Density Factor (EDF) of trees to be preserved is calculated by converting the diameter of individual trees slated for preservation to density factor units as follows (all existing trees are assumed to be hardwoods): 

 
(3)  Replacement Density Factor (RDF) calculates the minimum density of new trees to be planted by subtracting the EDF from the SDF: 

 
(4)  Table B is used to determine the RDF as follows: 

 
d)  Specimen trees warrant special consideration and encouragement for preservation. Specimen trees shall be protected from all construction activities by the placement of a tree save barrier fence (minimum 48 inch height orange mesh fence). The tree save barrier fence shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet outside the drip line of said specimen tree. 
E.  Methods of tree protection. 
1)  The protective zone for designated tree save areas shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree(s) canopy, as defined by the farthest canopy dripline of the tree(s). 
2)  Construction site activities such as material storage, concrete washout, burnhole placement, etc., may not encroach into designated tree protective zones. 
3)  No disturbance shall occur within the protective zone of specimen trees or stands of trees without prior approval by the Administrator. 
4)  The use of tree save islands and stands is encouraged over the protection of individual (non-specimen) trees scattered throughout a site. This will facilitate ease in overall site organization, increase the effectiveness of protection measures and prevent pathology. 
F.  Protective barriers. 
1)  Prior to any land disturbance, active protective fencing shall be installed so that it surrounds the critical root zones of all protected tree zones. 
2)  Active protective tree fences must be at least 4 feet high and may be either a wood and post construction or orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing. 
3)  Passive forms of tree protection may be utilized to delineate tree save areas which are remote from areas of land disturbance. These area must be completely surrounded with continuous rope or flagging (heavy mill. minimum 4 inches wide). 
4)  All tree protection zones (both active and passive) should be designated as such with "tree save area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances although the developer shall be held responsible for any violations found. 
5)  All specimen trees or stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones must be protected from the sedimentation of erosion control. Silt screening must be placed along the outer uphill edge of tree protective zones at the land disturbance interface and shall be backed by twelve (12) gauge two (2) inch x four (4) inch wire mesh fencing in areas of steep slope. 
6)  All tree fencing and erosion control barriers must be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbance process and building construction and may not be removed until landscaping is installed. 
G.  Vehicle use areas. 
1)  Interior landscaping: Interior landscaping of parking lots shall contain planter islands located so as to relieve the expanse of parking, provide shading and channel water runoff. A maximum of 12 parking spaces in a row shall be permitted without a planter island. Planter islands shall have a minimum of 125 square feet in area and shall contain at least one non-pine species tree having at installation a minimum DBH of 2 inches and 10 feet in height. This requirement may be waived in those instances in which facing parking rows are separated by a continuous island at least five feet in width containing at least one tree every fifteen feet. The remaining area shall be landscaped with appropriate materials. 
2)  Each area of the site which abuts public right-of-way (or improved accessways providing access to the interior of a development) must provide a planted border not less than 10 feet in width parallel to right of way lines (5 feet minimum for accessways). These planted border areas must have at least one tree having a minimum DBH of 2 inches for each 20 lineal feet of border area with a minimum of 2 trees if the strip is greater than 25 feet in length. Pine species are excluded from parking islands and along right-of-ways/accessways. The remainder of the planted area shall be landscaped with appropriate materials. 
3)  Accessways. Landscaped border areas may be interrupted to provide perpendicular vehicular and/or pedestrian ingress and egress, maximum 24 feet wide. 
4)  Encroachment. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment. Car stops shall be located so as to prevent damage to any trees, fences, shrubs or landscaping by automobiles. 
J[H].  Revegetation. 
1)  The replacement of trees must occur if the EDF does not meet the calculated SDF. The quantity of replacement trees must be sufficient so as to produce a total site-tree density factor which meets the requirements established in subsection (D)(4)[ of this section]. (Note: the terms 'unit' and 'tree' are NOT interchangeable). 
2)  Species selected for replacement must be quality specimens and ecologically compatible with the site. Table G lists those species of trees generally acceptable for credit in density calculations based upon use or need. The Administrator has information on trees and may accept alternatives to those listed in Table G. Pine species may only be planted in buffer or screening areas to the rear of the principal use and are specifically excluded from parking islands and along right-of-ways. No more than 50% of all new trees may be pine species, regardless of their planting location. 
3)  Any portion of the subject property which is within a utility power easement is required to meet the height standards of the controlling entity. These areas may be required by the City to have additional vegetation installed to compensate for these restrictions, subject to approval from the Mayor and/or his/her designee. 
4)  All trees and landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and according to accepted planting procedures with quality materials as provided in literature from the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Extension Service. All landscaping shall be completed within 6 months after the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, however any required fencing shall be installed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Should the landscaping not be completed in this period, it shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
5)  The owner, occupant, tenant or agent, shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. Landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation. Any dead vegetation and landscaping material or any damaged nonliving landscaping materials shall be promptly replaced. 
K[I].  General landscaping requirements. Beyond tree protection and revegetation, the extent of permissible impervious surfaces and required landscaping are regulated through the standards of the controlling zoning district. Landscaping may include grass, hedges and trees as well as natural features. All site plans submitted for new construction or renovations to an existing building in which the construction costs exceed 51 percent of the building's appraised value as shown on the current tax records (subject to those exemptions specified in Subsection B[ of this section]) must contain a separate landscape plan which includes the following information: 
1)  The name of the project. 
2)  The name of the owner and/or developer. 
3)  The location of proposed building(s) and corresponding dimensions. 
4)  Spatial limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
5)  All required undisturbed buffers, landscape strips and parking islands. 
6)  The location and listing of all specimen trees or stands of specimen trees. 
7)  Areas of tree protection and revegetation and all relevant tree density calculations. 
8)  The specific name and location of all materials to be planted or maintained on the site. 
9)  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation and maintenance of tree protection measures including, but not limited to, detail drawings of protective tree fencing (both active and passive) including signage and erosion control measures. 
10)  Planting and staking specifications. 
11)  The percentage of the total lot containing impervious surfaces. 
12)  The percentage of the total lot which shall remain undisturbed. 
13)  The percentage of the total lot devoted to landscaping. 
L[J].  Residential development requirements. Residential developments except RE and R-40 developments shall provide tree cover based upon the following: 
1)  Developments shall provide a total of 15 trees per acre as applied to individual lots based upon the proportional lot size. Example: ½-acre lot would provide 7.5 trees. 
2)  Minimum tree size to be considered for existing trees shall be 5-inch caliper. 
3)  Minimum tree size to be considered for newly planted trees shall be 2.5-inch caliper. 
M[K].  Acceptable tree species. Table 106-6 denotes those species of trees which may be incorporated for full credit towards the tree replacement requirements of paragraph (D)[Subsection D of this section]. Other trees may be approved on a case by case basis provided they are large growing and ecologically compatible with the site. Revegetation plans containing at least ten new trees must incorporate at least three separate tree species with no single tree species accounting for more than 50% of all newly planted trees. Pine trees can be utilized for screening and buffer areas only. All planting and replanting plans are subject to approval through the Administrator. 
TABLE 106-6 - TREE SPECIES SELECTION LIST 

 
N[L].  Enforcement, violations and penalties. Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be the responsibility of the Mayor and/or his/her designee. If, after inspection of a project by the Mayor or their[and/or his/her] designee, the plan materials installed on the site do not comply with the approved plan, such deficiencies shall be noted in writing. If the Administrator deems the deviations from the approved plan acceptable, they will so note, and the owner, occupant, tenant, and/or representative will be required to submit promptly a revised plan showing the actual plantings. This revised plan will be placed on file with the Mayor and/or his/her designee. If after inspection, the mayor or their designee determines the site does not comply with the approved plan and further determines it to be unacceptable, the owner developer, occupant, tenant and/or respective agent shall be notified in writing by the Mayor or their[and/or his/her] designee of said violations and given 30 days in which to correct all violations. Failure to make such corrections shall be a violation of this section. 
O[M].  Appeal. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority and duty to consider and act upon any application submitted for adjustment of standards provided herein. 
FIGURE 106-1. CRITICAL ROOT ZONE FOR TREE PROTECTION 

DIVISION 107. - TRAFFIC AND PARKING STANDARDS 

Sec. 107.1. - Purpose. 
These standards are intended to provide the reasonable provision of future off street parking within the City of Ball Ground; to restrict temporary storage of vehicles and recreational vehicles in residential districts; to alleviate any unnecessary traffic congestion which could result from on street parking; and to encourage development and usage of off street parking facilities. 
Sec. 107.2. - Street access and curb cuts. 
A.  Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street for at least 40 feet or has access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement if approved by the Administrator and Public Works Director. 
B.  Street access and curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits and other similar facilities on public streets in other than residential districts shall be approved by the Public Works Director. Curb cuts constructed for new driveways to developments on arterial and collector streets shall be aligned directly across from existing curb cuts. The Public Works Director may approve other locations when it is determined that alignment with an existing curb cut is not appropriate. No curb cuts shall be located within 40 feet of any intersection or within 30 feet of another curb cut measured along the curb line. A curb cut shall be no greater than 30 feet in width, and no closer than 20 feet to any property line unless approved by the Public Works Director. 
C.  All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state highway department prior to the construction of such street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive. 
D.  No curb cuts for commercial developments may be placed along residential streets. 
Sec. 107.3. - Street improvements. 
A.  The Public Works Director may require improvements such as the widening of streets and/or rights of way or the addition of curbs and gutters, in order to accommodate the increased traffic due to proposed developments. 
B.  Existing streets shall be connected and extended throughout the limits of proposed developments. If such street is already used primarily for residential access, requested street improvements to provide access to a proposed non-residential use must be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals before being connected, extended or in any way provided access to the non residential use. 
C.  New developments containing at least four structures and/or ten dwelling units must provide sidewalks. 
Sec. 107.4. - Corner visibility clearance. 
In all districts except CBD, no fence, structure, sign, planting or other obstruction (above a height of 3 feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right of way unless approved by the Public Works Director. 
Sec. 107.5. - Parking spaces required. 
The required number of parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the use it serves, except: 
A.  If vehicular parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit such space to be provided on other off street property, provided such space lies within 400 feet of the main entrance of such principal use and meets the storage requirements set forth in [Section] 105.7. Such vehicular parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not hereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
B.  The required parking spaces of any number of separated uses may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required spaces assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sunday. 
C.  No street parking spaces may be allowed as meeting the parking requirement except in the CBD district. There shall be no required parking spaces in the CBD district except as provided in Section 104.7. 
D.  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long term storage of any vehicle or equipment. 
E.  Required spaces. Table 107-1 enumerates the maximum off-street parking provision standards for all properties within the City. If a building or development contains multiple uses, the number of spaces required shall be calculated by summing the amount required by each individual use and multiplying the sum by a factor of 0.8. Parking areas are encouraged to be set to the side or rear of the primary building in such a manner as to reduce visibility from the street (see individual zoning districts for density bonuses relating to parking location and/or structures). 
F.  If required parking is provided exclusively in the rear yard, then the required front yard setback may be reduced 50%. 
G.  Any entity that retrofits an existing site without vehicular or pedestrian interconnection to provide permanent access to adjacent sites' parking and sidewalks shall be allowed a 10% reduction in required parking. 
TABLE 107-1 - MAXIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING ALLOWED 

 
Sec. 107.6. - Surface parking standards. 
A.  The parking of any vehicle (including, but not limited to, trailers and boats) on any lot in any district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate vehicles up to 8,000 pounds gross axle weight is prohibited. 
B.  Minimum standards for surfaces treated and hardened to accommodate vehicles up to 8,000 pounds are as follows: 
C.  A parking plan for all but individual single-family residential uses shall be submitted with the building plans. The Administrator and Public Works Director shall review the proposed parking plan to insure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this article. Occupancy or use of a building shall not be allowed until the parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. The provisions of the required spaces on a temporary basis on a hard surfaced sub base (subgrade plus an asphalt first layer or bound crushed stone aggregate) shall satisfy this requirement. All parking facilities including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas shall comply with the following: 
1)  Design of parking areas, including space and driveway arrangement, shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, which is hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. Have access to a public street and be graded and paved. Curbing may be required when needed for effective drainage control to prevent damage to abutting property or public streets, subject to approval by the Public Works Director. 
2)  Have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations (single-family residential uses and lots of fewer that 5 spaces are exempted). 
3)  Provide individual parking spaces with dimensions not less than 9 feet wide and 20 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. In the cases of 25 or more required parking spaces 25% of the required spaces may be of an area not less than 8 feet x 16 feet. 
4)  Provide interior drives with a minimum width of 20 feet which connect each space with a public street. 
5)  Parking areas established within a residential district for a permitted non residential use shall provide visual screening between vehicle use areas, including all accessways, and the abutting residential property. Such screening may consist of a wall or solid fence no less than five feet in height and/or a vegetative row of hedges and trees sufficient in nature to provide continuous visual screening. Such screening improvements shall be located upon a non-paved surface at least 5 feet in width and are subject to approval by the Administrator. See standards set forth in Section 106.5 (Tree Protection and Landscaping) for landscaping requirements. 
6)  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
7)  No parking or loading area shall be established in the required front yard of any residential district except for a single-family residential use; no more than 35 percent of the required front yard may be paved or used for parking in such case. 
8)  The parking areas shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants for their invites or licensees so long as the use(s) exists. 
Sec. 107.7. - Parking in residential districts. 
A.  Business vehicles under 8,000 pounds axle weight shall be allowed to park in the side or rear yard of the residentially zoned property. Business vehicles weighing or exceeding 8,000 pounds axle weight shall be allowed to park in residentially zoned property during daylight hours, but not overnight or on Saturdays or Sundays. Daylight hours shall mean 30 minutes after dawn to 30 minutes before sunset. 
B.  No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to park in the front of the principal structure in a district zoned for residential purposes. If the property is located on a corner lot, no parking of the vehicle may occur within 20 feet of the rear side that abuts a public street. 
C.  Vehicle repair may not be conducted on vehicles located on any public street. This prohibition shall not apply to emergency repairs taking less than 24 hours to complete. 
Sec. 107.8. - Off street loading requirements. 
Where required, off street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. Such facilities must be designed so that no truck/vehicle maneuvering occurs on the public right of way nor in areas designated for the parking of vehicles except in the Central Business District in which case designated loading zones may also be utilized. Loading areas must be adequately screened from residentially zoned properties, subject to approval from the Administrator. 
TABLE 107-2 - OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

 
DIVISION 108. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 108.1. - Administration authority. 
The Administrator shall administer and enforce this article including departmental approval of all development permits. If the Administrator or his designated representative shall find that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures including illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this article to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
Sec. 108.2. - Administrative variances. 
The Administrator is hereby authorized to grant variances (except for density and use) from the development standards of this article, where, in their opinion, the intent of the article can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting the variance. A fee of $25 per standard varied shall be charged. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to 10% of any development standard except as noted below: 
[A.]  Front or major side setbacks: up to 10 feet. 
[B.]  Side setback: up to 5 feet per side. 
[C.]  Rear setback: up to 10 feet. 
[D.]  Buffer area: up to 10 feet. 
[E.]  Required parking: 20% of the total required. 
Sec. 108.3. - Review of development permit applications. 
A.  A review shall be required for any proposed use of land before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading or alteration of land or building commences to determine compliance with all provisions of this article. Site plans and other development plans required to be submitted under the provisions of this article shall be prepared only by those currently registered for such work in accordance with applicable state laws; plans for structures whose value exceeds $10,000 shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect. Development permit applications shall be reviewed by the Administrator and shall be accompanied by complete plans signed by the author. Such plans shall provide: 
1)  A 24 hour contact; 
2)  A scale drawing showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered; 
3)  The existing or intended use of each building or part of a building; 
4)  The number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; 
5)  The location of all bulk sanitation containers; and 
6)  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of this article. 
B.  Approval of preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision or planned development regulations shall constitute approval of the development permit for such subdivision or development. 
C.  All building permits approved by the City shall in no case grant any building permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation of the provisions of this article or any other codes and laws of the city or the state, except as provided herein. 
Sec. 108.4. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, rezoning and variance applications, special land use permits and other matters pertaining to this article. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
Sec. 108.5. - Building inspector. 
The duties of the building inspector with respect to this article shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  The issuance of building permits in accordance with all provisions of this article. 
B.  Making field inspections to determine that the building or structure being constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered or used is being pursued in accordance with the site plan for which a building permit has been issued. The building inspector shall issue citations when a violation is found to exist so that appropriate legal action may be taken to insure compliance. 
C.  Determining, to the best of their ability, that all construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable City code requirements prior to allowing occupancy. 
Sec. 108.6. - Appeals from decisions of the Administrator. 
It is the intention of this article that all questions arising in conjunction with the administration, interpretation and enforcement of this article by the Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. All appeals of the decision of the Administrator must be submitted in writing to the Administrator within 10 days of the written decision. 
Sec. 108.7. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be in violation of any provision of this article, the Administrator or any other appropriate authority of the city may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice of the violation to the owner and/or any other person in violation of this article, issue a citation for violation of city code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court, institute an injunction or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. The Administrator may, in addition to other remedies, notify that utility service be withheld there from until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
Sec. 108.8. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined up to $500 for each violation and/or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in each separate offense. 
Except for a different violation, each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense but only after the passage of 30 days from the date of conviction. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Ball Ground from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
DIVISION 109. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 109.1. - Establishment and appointment. 
There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members, residents of the City of Ball Ground, appointed by the City Council for overlapping terms of 3 years. Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
Sec. 109.2. - Organization. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is re elected or his successor is elected. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the Board may decide. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be maintained by the Administrator and shall be a public record. 
Sec. 109.3. - Powers and duties. 
A.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the powers to: 
1)  Hear and decide appeals from the decision of the Administrator where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination. 
2)  Grant variances from zoning regulations of this article in cases where strict application of such regulations would result in unnecessary hardship; but only in harmony with the spirit and intent of these regulations and is the minimum necessary to grant relief without injury to the public interest. All such variances must be based upon the evidence submitted before the Board of Zoning Appeals and upon its findings, supported by the testimony or by documentary testimony that such variance shall be required by one of the following causes: 
a)  Because[ ] the existence in good faith of a nonconforming use at a time prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ball Ground, or amendments thereto, requires the continuance of such nonconforming use; 
b)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions creating a substantial hardship to the applicant which pertain to the particular piece of property or building in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
B.  Every such judgment of the Board of Zoning Appeals granting a variance, appeal or special land use permit shall be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the reasons thereof. In all cases no variance shall be granted unless the Board finds all of the following conditions exist: 
a)  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not generally apply to other land or buildings; 
b)  That the condition from which relief is sought did not result from action by the applicant or property owner; 
c)  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant. 
C.  In granting any variance under the provisions of this section, the Board of Zoning Appeals may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantially the objectives of these regulations and may designate conditions to be performed or met by the user or property owner, out of regard for the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community, including safeguards for, with respect to light, air, areas of occupancy, density of population and conformity to any master land-use traffic plan, the future development of the City. 
D.  Approved variances must be implemented within a period of 12 months. After 12 months, Board approval must be obtained again. A building permit must be obtained and the development underway within the 12-month time period. 
E.  The Board may in conformity with this article reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and to that end shall have all the duty of the Administrator to carry out the decisions of the Board. 
F.  Variances may not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals conditioned upon the approval by City Council of an application to amend this article or to amend the Official Zoning Map. 
G.  Variances granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or City Council shall only remain in effect as long as the property to which it applies remains in the same zoning classification such property was in at the time the variance was granted. 
Sec. 109.4. - Procedures. 
A.  An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental officer, department, Board or agency affected by any decision of the Administrator with respect to this article. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of action appealed from, unless the Administrator certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. 
B.  A copy of the paid in full tax bill or a letter from the Cherokee County Tax Department stating that all taxes have been paid must accompany the application for a variance before it will be processed. 
C.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying any variances granted. 
D.  Time limit on resubmission. An application for a variance affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months; however, an applicant may petition the Board of Zoning[ Appeals] to waive the 12 month waiting period by demonstrating that the situations or amount of variance requested which led to denial have materially changed or if the request is materially different. 
Sec. 109.5. - Public hearings. 
The Board shall hold a public hearing on all requests for special exceptions, variances and appeals on which it acts. 
A.  Applications for a hearing and decision on requests for variances, appeals, and special exceptions shall be filed with the Administrator on forms he shall provide at least 30 days prior (or less at staff discretion) to the meeting at which they may be heard. Each application shall contain such information as the Administrator may require to enable the Board to make its decision including, but not limited to, a plat drawn to scale showing the following: 
1)  All property lines, with dimensions on an appropriate scale to allow staff review; 
2)  A legal description of the tract involved; 
3)  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks, and easements referenced to the property; 
4)  North arrow, land district and land lot number; and 
5)  Location of setback lines or other requirements from which the variance is sought. 
B.  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the appellant and all abutting property owners; provided, however, that where any such property is owned by a limited partnership, partnership or joint venture, only the person or entity in whose name said property is returned for taxes, as shown by the city tax records shall be entitled to notice hereunder. The names and addresses of all such abutting property owners who are entitled to notice under this section shall be determined from the city tax records as of the date on which the application is filed. As used in this section, the term "street" shall not include an interstate highway. In addition to the above notice requirements, the Administrator shall post in a conspicuous place on the property a sign or signs which shall contain information as to the date, the time and purpose of the hearing. Public notice shall also be given in the local newspaper at least 15 days before the hearing. 
C.  No submitted application may be amended after public notice of the request has been given provided, however, the Board may allow such application to be amended during the public hearing. 
D.  The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of the public hearing as are consistent with state laws and the City Code and are appropriate to its responsibilities. 
E.  Notice of requests before the Board shall be sent to all City Councilmembers. 
Sec. 109.6. - Assistance by staff. 
The Administrator shall provide such technical and clerical assistance as the Board may require and shall maintain permanent and complete records of the activities of the Board. 
Sec. 109.7. - Bylaws. 
The Board shall adopt such rules for its own internal administration and procedure, including, but not limited to, conflict of interest rules, to insure that no member is entitled to rule on or adjudicate a matter in which he has an interest directly or indirectly. 
Sec. 109.8. - Appeals from actions of the board. 
Any party aggrieved by any final judgement or decision of the Board may within 30 days thereafter appeal therefrom to the Cherokee County Superior Court. The appellant shall furnish the Board a written notice of appeal specifying the judgement or decision from which appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the Board shall cause a record of the proceedings in the case to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken and the case shall, in such court, be a new trial. 
DIVISION 110. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 110.1. - Generally. 
A.  This article, including the Official Zoning Map, may be amended by the City Council on its own motion, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation; provided, however, that after any such amendment has been submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Commission and its recommendation made thereon, the City Council shall have the right to modify such amendment or place conditions thereon, and it shall not be necessary to resubmit such amendment, as modified or conditioned, to the Planning Commission. Before enacting an amendment to this article, the City Council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon. 
B.  Application to amend this article may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or Official Zoning Map. Unless initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission, all applications for map amendments must be submitted by the owner (as determined by controlling at least a 51% interest in the property) or the authorized agent of such property. An application for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every twelve (12) months; however, this provision shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment filed by the City Council or Planning Commission. 
Sec. 110.2. - Application for map amendments. 
A.  Each application to amend the Official Zoning Map shall be filed with the Administrator at least 31 days prior to the Planning Commission hearing at which they may be heard. Each application shall include such information as the Administrator may require including, but not limited to: 
1)  A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned; 
2)  A plat showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid (his seal shall be affixed to the plat); 
3)  The present and proposed zoning classification for the tract(s); 
4)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; 
5)  The name(s) and address(es) of abutting properties, including properties across public right-of-way; 
6)  A copy of the recorded warranty deed (or other instrument of title) which vested title to the property in the applicant; 
7)  A copy of the paid in full tax bill or a letter from the Cherokee County Tax Department stating that all taxes have been paid; and 
8)  A site plan showing any and all proposed improvements to be constructed if the application is approved. 
B.  This application shall be accompanied by a fee to partially defray the public expense of processing the application. A fee shall not be charged if an official governmental agency files the application or if the rezoning is a result of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which requires all annexed properties to have a zoning hearing, provided said hearing designates a zoning classification which is the most equivalent to the existing county zoning. 
C.  No submitted application may be amended after public notice of the request has been given provided, however, the Planning Commission and/or City Council may allow such application to be amended during the public hearing. 
D.  The applicant or agent shall be present at the hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council with regard to said application. In the event that an agent is present, rather than the applicant, such agent must have full authority to act on behalf of the applicant with regard to all matters pertaining to said application. 
E.  The applicant shall be allowed to submit renderings, site plans and other exhibits purporting to depict what is to be constructed should a map amendment be approved; however, the applicant may be required to develop according to such plans if approved by the City Council. Any deviation from such approved plans would require another rezoning application be filed. The City Council may also require or attach to any rezoning such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so as to improve the quality of life through the protection against air, water and noise pollution and promotion of aesthetic considerations. 
F.  An application may not be withdrawn by the applicant within 48 hours prior to a hearing on the matter, however, the City Council may, by a majority of the members present, allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 12 month limitation, or allow an application to be amended. Failure of the applicant or their representative to appear at the scheduled hearing may result in automatic dismissal with prejudice, rejection of the application or continuance of the hearing at the sole discretion of the Planning Commission or City Council. 
Sec. 110.3. - Supporting information and data. 
The Administrator upon receiving an application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall prepare and transmit a report to the Planning Commission and City Council determining: 
•  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
•  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use of usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
•  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
•  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use that may cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
•  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use plan; and 
•  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approved or disapproved zoning proposal. 
Sec. 110.4. - Planning commission action. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on each rezoning application in accordance with their adopted schedule and procedures. The staff report on each application shall be considered and testimony solicited from the applicant and those interested citizens. The Planning Commission shall review the following factors in making a determination on the application: 
1)  Existing uses and zoning classifications of nearby property; 
2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the plaintiffs promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
7)  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
8)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
9)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the comprehensive land use plan; 
10)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
11)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
B.  As to each application, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, denial, or approval to another zoning district or tabling of the request. A copy of the Planning Commission's recommendations shall be prepared and submitted to the City Council. If the Planning Commission fails to recommend action on the application within 45 days of the public hearing and the applicant does not agree in writing to a waiver of this time limit, the applicant may take it to the City Council without a Planning Commission recommendation. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings and meetings as are consistent with state law and the City code and are appropriate to its responsibilities which shall be published and available to the public, as well as conflict of interest rules, to ensure that no member is entitled to rule on a matter in which he has an direct or indirect interest. 
Sec. 110.5. - City council action. 
A.  The City Council shall hold a hearing on all requests to amend this article and the Official Zoning Map contained therein. Prior to such hearing the City Council shall review the staff report and recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
B.  So that the purpose of this article will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, the City Council may approve, approve with stipulations (which may be site-specific), deny, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning classification requested, table until the next meeting or allow an application to be withdrawn (with or without prejudice at the discretion of the Council). 
C.  The decision by City Council to approve in whole or part, reject, condition or delete an application for rezoning shall be based on, but not limited to, a consideration of the following: 
1)  Existing uses and zoning classifications of nearby property; 
2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the plaintiffs promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
7)  Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
8)  Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
9)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the comprehensive land use plan; 
10)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
11)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
D.  In acting on such application, the City Council shall have the authority to grant the applicant variances from the regulations and provisions of this article in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 109.3. 
Sec. 110.6. - Reversionary clause. 
If at the time of 12 months from the date of rezoning of property the owner has not obtained a building permit, and presented the necessary development plans as determined by the Administrator on at least a portion of said property, the Administrator may propose a map amendment to rezone the property back to the previous zoning district classification. The owner of the property will be notified of the reversionary action to take place and afforded an opportunity to appear before the Planning Commission and City Council to show cause why the reversionary action should not be taken. 
Sec. 110.7. - Public notification. 
A.  Due notice of all public hearings on an application for text or map amendment shall be published at least 15 but no more than 45 days prior to the public hearing in the newspaper denoted as the legal organ of the City and shall include the date, time and place of said public hearings. 
B.  At least 15 days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing, the applicant shall post on a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, an official sign or signs containing information as to the application and date, time and place of public hearings as specified by the Administrator. 
C.  The Administrator shall notify by regular mail all abutting Cherokee County property owners as shown by the most recent City tax records at the addresses shown on said records. Such notification shall be mailed at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearings and must include the proposed zoning change, as well as the date, time and place of the scheduled public hearings. 
D.  If an application for map amendment is postponed at the request of the applicant, due notice of the new public hearings on the application must be republished and reposted as per the requirements above. The costs of said advertisements shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
Sec. 110.8. - Home rule annexation. 
A.  The Administrator, upon receiving a request for annexation, shall determine whether such application complies with legal and procedural requirements. If it does not comply with requirements, the City shall notify in writing the persons presenting the application, stating wherein the application is deficient. If it is determined that the application does comply with this article, the City shall proceed to act on the application in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-36-36. 
B.  Within seven days of accepting an application for annexation, the Administrator shall give written notice to Cherokee County by certified mail and include a map or other description of the site proposed to be annexed sufficient to identify the area. 
C.  The City shall hold separate public hearings on the proposed annexation and zoning of the property, not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days from the time a determination is made that the petition is valid. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in writing to the persons presenting the application and shall be advertised in the local newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the hearing. If, after the public hearing, the governing body determines that the annexation would be in the best interests of the area's residents and property owners and of the citizens of the City, an annexing ordinance shall be adopted within 60 days following validation of the signature of the applicants. 
D.  All annexation proposals shall be zoned similar to the previous zoning district designation by Cherokee County. 
Sec. 110.9. - Legislative annexation. 
Annexation into the corporate limits of the City by action of the Georgia State Legislature will conform to the requirements of section 110.08 above, except that the City Council will not pass the ordinance zoning the annexed tract until after action by the legislature. 
DIVISION 111. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 111.1. - Interpretation of words. 
A.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; and words in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
C.  The word "may" is permissive. 
D.  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
E.  The word "structure" includes the word "building." 
F.  Words not defined herein shall be construed as having the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2010) 
Sec. 111.2. - Definitions of terms. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Abut: To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line. 
Accessory building or use: A use or a structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot and serving the purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building. 
Administrator: The Mayor of Ball Ground or his designee. 
Agriculture: The production, rearing or storage of crops and/or livestock for sale, lease or personal use, or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. 
Alley: A service way providing only a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration: Any change or re arrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. 
Animal hospitals: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short term care incidental to the hospital use. 
Apartment house: A structure containing three or more dwelling units. 
Apartment unit: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self contained dwelling unit in a building containing more than two dwelling units. 
Assisted living facility: A facility licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate housing, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
Automobile maintenance: The routine replacement and maintenance of non-engine related parts including brake repair, tire replacement, tune-ups, and oil changing. This term shall not include engine or body dismantling. 
Automobile repair: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers such as collision service, body repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning; and undercoating. 
Automobile service station (gas, filling station): A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation or minor services, customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted if enclosed in a building. 
Automobile wrecking yard: Any place where two or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operating condition, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any goods, articles or merchandise. 
Basement: That portion of a building built partly underground having one half or more of its height below the average level of the lot grade. 
Bedroom: A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom or living room. 
Block: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad right of way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Boarding house: A building, or portion thereof, where meals and lodging are provided for compensation for at least three persons and not more than ten persons exclusive of the proprietor, members of the proprietor's family and servants of the establishment. 
Buffer area: A strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another with which it is incompatible containing a continuous visual screening of vegetation and fencing. 
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building coverage: The horizontal area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. 
Building facade: The portion of any exterior elevation of a building extended from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes, and which may also be referred to as the building face. 
Building permit: Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line: A line, usually fixed parallel to the lot line, beyond which a building, or any projection thereof, cannot extend, excluding uncovered steps terraces, stoops or similar fixtures. 
Bulk storage: The storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other materials in aboveground containers for subsequent resale to distributors or retail dealers or outlets. 
Business park: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual office uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
Cellar: A level within a building having more than one-half of its height on all sides below grade. 
Central business district (CBD): The major shopping area within a city usually containing, in addition to retail uses, governmental offices, service uses, professional, cultural, recreational and entertainment establishments and uses, hotels, appropriate industrial activities, and transportation facilities. 
Certificate of occupancy (CO): A document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances. 
Child care center: A private establishment enrolling five or more children and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged. The term includes day nurseries and kindergartens. 
Church: A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
City: The City of Ball Ground. 
Clerk of Superior Court: Shall mean the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Clinic: A building or part of a building used for medical, dental, chiropractic, surgical or therapeutic treatment of human beings, excluding hospitals or professional offices of a doctor located in their residence wherein there is no overnight lodging of patients. 
Club or lodge, private: Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Conditional use: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use would not be detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare. Such uses may be required to meet additional standards and may be controlled as to the number, area and spacing from other uses and each other. 
Condominium: A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Condominium, commercial: A building or buildings used for offices, businesses, professional services and other commercial enterprise organized, owned and maintained as a condominium. 
Construction vehicle: Any vehicle (other than passenger vehicle, pick up or panel truck) whose primary purpose is use in land development and construction including, but not limited to, earth moving equipment and dump trucks. 
Covenant: A private legal restriction on the use of land, contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded. 
Cul de sac: A minor street with only one outlet, sometimes called a "dead end" street. 
Curb cut: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway. 
Density: The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land. The standard for density shall be the gross density which includes all the land within the boundaries of the area excluding floodplains, wetlands and standing bodies of water. 
Detention facility: A municipal, county, or state jail used for the detention of prisoners; including; penal institutions, penitentiaries, prisons and prison institutions; detention and correctional institutions; rehabilitation institutions and work camps. 
Development: The division of an existing parcel of land; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
Display case: A case, cabinet, or other device having a window of glass or other transparent material, or other opening, access to which is made from other than within the structure or building of which it is a part or attached to. 
District: A part, zone or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
Domesticated animals: Small animals including fish or fowl permitted in the house or yard and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds and fish but excluding swine, livestock and exotic animals. 
Drive in establishment: An establishment which is designated to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobile parked on the premises. 
Drive in restaurant: A building or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the building. 
Driveway: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure. 
Drug store: A store where the primary business is the filling of medical prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices and supplies, and nonprescription medicines, but where nonmedical products are sold as well. 
Dwelling, duplex: A building that is divided horizontally into two dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than two families. 
[Dwelling, multi-family]Multi-family dwelling, multiple or: A building designed for and containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, quadruplex: Four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with adjoining unit or units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed for and containing one dwelling unit occupied by one family unit. 
Dwelling, single-family attached: A one family dwelling attached to two or more one family dwellings by common vertical walls. This term includes duplexes and triplexes. 
Dwelling, triplex: A building divided into only three dwelling units each of which has an independent entrance either directly or through a common vestibule and used by not more than three families 
Dwelling unit: Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included in each "dwelling unit." 
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity. 
Family: One or more related persons or four or less unrelated persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit provided that all related persons are related by blood, marriage or adoption. All related persons are limited to the spouse, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, stepchildren, sons, daughters, brothers or sisters of the owner or the tenant or of the owner's or the tenant's spouse. Domestic servants employed on premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean fraternity, sorority, club, student center, group care homes, foster homes and is to be distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, or apartment unit as herein defined. 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
Flag lot: A lot or parcels approved by the City with less frontage on a public street than is normally required. The panhandle is an access corridor to lots or parcels located behind lots or parcels with normally required street frontages. 
Floodplain: That area within the 100-year regional flood contour elevation subject to periodic flooding as designated by the public works director based upon the U.S. Corp. of Engineers Flood Plain Information Reports and other federal, state and county hydraulic studies. 
Floor area: The total area of all floors of a building as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, excluding attached garages, porches, balconies, cellars and unfinished basements. 
Frontage: The length of any property line of a premises which abuts public right-of-way. 
Fraternity or sorority house: A dwelling maintained exclusively for members affiliated with an academic college or university or other professional recognized institutions of higher learning. 
Funeral home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Garage, commercial: A commercial structure or any portion thereof in which one or more automobiles are housed, or kept or repaired; not including exhibition or showrooms or storage of cars for sale nor storage of junked or wrecked vehicles. 
Garage, private residential: A structure which is accessory to a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. 
Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
Group home: A dwelling shared by non-related individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. This use shall also apply to homes for the handicapped; however, the term "handicapped" shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or alcohol, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the handicapped" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing serving as an alternative to incarceration. 
Halfway house: A temporary residential living arrangement for persons leaving an institutional setting and in need of a supportive living arrangement in order to readjust to living outside the institution. These are persons who are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff who are present when residents are present, for the following purposes: 1) to help them recuperate from the effects of drug or alcohol addiction; 2) to help them reenter society while housed under supervision while under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited to, prerelease, work release, or probationary programs; or 3) to help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. 
Health department: Shall mean the Cherokee County Health Department. 
Health practitioner: A doctor, dentist, chiropractor but not including a veterinarian 
Height: The vertical distance between the highest part of a structure, sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the ground. The vertical distance from the grade, or its equivalent, to the highest point of the under side of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean level of the under side of the rafters between the eaves and the ridge of the gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Hobby: A pursuit outside one's regular occupation engaged in for relaxation and nonprofit making. 
Home for the aged: Any multi-family residential use limited to occupation by persons age 62 or older, with exception of managerial personnel. HUD elderly housing and handicapped housing; provided no health care services are furnished other than communication systems. 
Hospital: A building or portion thereof designed or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation and which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Improvement: Any man made item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate. 
Impervious surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water including streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
Industrial park: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, including warehousing and distribution, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. 
Junk vehicles: Any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other vehicle by reason of its being wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantle, abandoned, discarded, or which does not have a valid license plate attached thereto. 
Junk yard: Any land or building or other structure used for the storage, collection, processing or conversion of any worn out, cast off, or discarded metal, paper, glass or other materials which is ready for destruction, or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Also, any land on which two or more junk vehicles are parked, standing, or allowed to remain. 
Kennel: Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of four dogs or cats or other animals or combination thereof (except litter of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on, and also raising of show and hunting dogs. 
Livestock: Poultry, cattle, swine, horses, mink, rabbits, sheep, goats or any other domestic animal used for consumption. 
Lot: The basic development unit, an area with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building and not divided by any public highway or alley. 
Lot, corner: A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. 
Lot, substandard: A lot not meeting the required minimum lot dimensions of the zoning district it is in. 
Lot coverage: That amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by a building(s) excluding parking areas, driveways and walkways but including accessory structures measured in terms of a percentage of the total lot area. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line, or the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Lot line: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot line measured along the front building line of the lot as determined by the prescribed minimum front setback requirement. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
Materials recovery facility: A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mini-warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on a individual basis. 
Mobile (Manufactured) home: A structure transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This unit must bear a HUD certificate. 
Mobile home park: An area containing one or more mobile homes or spaces for mobile homes and the necessary community and utility areas for extended occupancy or residence. 
Modular home: A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes having been built to state construction codes. 
Motel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging is provided for transient guests and offered to the public for compensation with access to each unit directly from the outside. 
Nonconforming use, building, lot, parcel of land: A legally existing use or building which fails to comply with any provision of this article either at the effective date of this article or as the result of subsequent amendments. 
Nursing home: A home for aged or ill persons licensed by the State of Georgia as such in which persons are provided with food, shelter and medical care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Occupant: The individual or individuals in actual possession of a premises. 
Office, general: Any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management or direction of an agency, business, organization, but excludes such uses as retail sales, manufacture, assembly or storage of goods, or places of assembly and amusement. 
Office, professional: Any building or part of a building in which one or more persons are employed in the management or direction of an agency, business, organization staffed by professionally qualified persons and their staff. Examples of qualified professions typically are licensed by the State of Georgia and include, but are not limited to, architects, real estate brokers, health service practitioners, accountants, engineers and attorneys. 
Official zoning map: A legally adopted map that conclusively shows the location and boundaries of zoned districts. 
Off street parking space: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located on a dedicated street right of way. 
Open space: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Parking area: Any public or private land area used for parking vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. 
Parking lot: Any designated area designed for temporary accommodation of motor vehicles in normal operating condition. 
Parking space: Any area for the exclusive parking of a single vehicle having an area of not less than 200 square feet. 
Permanent sign: Any sign attached securely to a building, roof, wall, or canopy or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces or treated wood or cedar, and continuing in the same state or without essential change to the sign structure. 
Permit: Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization. 
Permitted use: Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Personal care home: A facility licensed by the State of Georgia for the transitional residency of persons incapable of independent living, within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services, transportation services and routine social and medical appointments and counseling. 
Pharmacy: A place where medicines are compounded or dispensed. 
Planned development: A tract of land developed based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
Planning commission: shall mean the Ball Ground Planning Commission or Planning Commission designated to act on behalf of the City of Ball Ground. 
Plat: A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. 
Plat, final: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan which is presented to the planning commission for final approval. 
Plat, preliminary: A map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the proper review authority for consideration and approval. 
Recovered materials: Those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility: A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
Recreational vehicles: Boat trailers and any type of portable structure without permanent foundations, which can be towed, hauled or driven and may be designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use, and including travel trailers, truck campers on or off the truck, camping trailers and self propelled motor homes. 
Recycling collection point: A primary or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources with no processing of such items taking place. 
Residence: A home or dwelling utilized as living quarters. 
Rest home: See Home for the aged . 
Retail services: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public, including eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation services, health, educational and social services, museums and galleries. 
Retail trade: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public and for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses. 
Rooming house: See Boarding house . 
School: State, county, city church or other schools, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high school learning centers. 
Setbacks: The required space between a property line and a building or specified structure. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments constructed as a singular entity with customer and employee parking provided on site. 
Sidewalk: A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway. 
Sign: Any structure, part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon or any material or thing, illuminated or otherwise, which displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, device, trademark or other representation used as or in the nature of an announcement, advertisement, direction or designation of any person, group, organization, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise or industry which is located upon any land or any building or upon a window. The flag, emblem or other insignia of a nation, government unit, educational, charitable or religious group shall not be included. 
Sign, animated: A sign with action or motion with moving characters or flashing colors which require electrical energy, including wind actuated elements, such as flags or banners. This term does not include time and temperature or revolving signs. 
Sign, announcement: A single face nonilluminated professional or announcement sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, and attached wholly to a building, window or door. Where such sign only includes emergency information, business hours, credit cards honored and other accessory information it shall be known as an "incidental use" sign not requiring a permit. 
Sign, building identification: A wall sign used to identify or indicate the name of a building. 
Sign, canopy: A sign imposed upon or painted on any roof like structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway, which can be mounted flush or suspended. 
Sign, changeable copy: A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
Sign, construction: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
Sign, detached: A permanent sign affixed to the ground which is wholly independent of any building for support. This term includes portable display signs. 
Sign, directory: A sign containing information relative to the location, distance to, entrance to, and exit from structures, or convenient for visitors coming on the property, including signs marking entrances and exists, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pick up and delivery areas, or land use activities. 
Sign, event: A temporary sign advertising private sales of personal property such as "house sales," "garage sales," "rummage sales" and the like or private not for profit events such as picnics, carnivals, game nights, art and craft shows and Christmas tree sales. 
Sign, flashing: A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 
Sign, general advertising: A detached sign which has a sign area greater than 250 square feet. 
Sign, illuminated: A sign illuminated directly or indirectly by gas, electricity or other artificial light including reflective or fluorescent light. 
Sign, marquee: A projection sign attached to a roofed structure of a building which may project over public or private sidewalk or rights of way. 
Sign, monument: A free standing, detached sign in which the width of the support structure (base) is no less than ¼ the overall height of the sign. The base shall not count toward the area of the sign. 
Sign, on-premises: Any sign the content of which relates to the premises on which it is located, referring to the name, location, products, persons, accommodations, services or activities of or on those premises, or the sale, lease, or construction of those premises, or conveying any other message regardless of whether said message relates to the premises where the sign is located. 
Sign, personal expression: A detached sign located on private property containing non-commercial messages of the property owner. Obscene messages are prohibited. 
Sign, political: Any sign used in connection with political campaigns or civic non commercial health, safety and welfare campaigns. 
Sign, portable display: A mobile/temporary, electrical or non electrical changeable copy sign that is mounted on a trailer type frame with or without wheels or skids or portable wood or metal frame and not permanently attached to the ground. 
Sign, projection: A sign which is attached to the building wall and which extends more than 18 inches from the face of such wall. 
Sign, real estate: A temporary sign advertising the sale, or lease of the property on which it is located. 
Sign, real estate directional: A sign which conveys directions to a specific property for sale or lease, such as a real estate development, residential subdivision, apartment or condominium, home for sale, apartment for rent, or any other property for sale or lease. 
Sign, roof: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
Sign, temporary: A display, informational sign, banner, or other advertisement device with or without a structural frame, not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground and intended for a limited period of display, including real estate signs, accessory temporary window or display case signs, and decorative displays for holidays, or public demonstrations. This definition does not include portable display signs. 
Sign, vehicular: Any sign on an operable vehicle or any vehicle parked temporarily, incidental to its principal use for transportation. This definition shall not include signs which are being transported to a site for erection. 
Sign, wall: Any sign attached to or erected against a wall which is an integral part of the building, and projects no more than 18 inches from the wall of the building. Such a sign may be constructed without constituting an encroachment into a required side or front yard setback line. A single face sign which is in any manner attached or fixed flat to an exterior wall of a building or structure. Individual letters in addition to the "box type" (i.e., letters and symbols on an attached backing) sign may also be installed. 
Sign, window: A sign affixed to or displayed within 1 foot of a window in any manner so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. 
Sign area: The entire face of a sign, its supporting structure and all wall work including illuminated tubing incidental to its decoration. In the case of an open sign made up of individual letters, figures, or designs attached directly to the building or standard the space between such letters, figures or designs shall be included as part of the sign area. When a sign has parallel sides or where the interior angle formed by the faces is less than 45?, the sign shall be considered double-faced. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face only. The copy area of all "V" or "L" shaped signs with an internal angle of greater than 45? shall be considered as a single face. If the faces of a double face sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
Sign clearance: The vertical distance from the established finished grade of the sidewalk or ground to the lower edge of a sign. 
Site plan: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority. 
Solid waste handling facility: Any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those finished basements used for the principal use with a floor area greater than 50% of the story above. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way. 
Street, private: Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access within a development which has not been dedicated to, nor accepted by the city, and which is not maintained by the city. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivider: A person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance or proceedings to subdivide such land under this article, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale, lease, legacy or building development; it includes all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access (whether private or public) or change in an existing street, and includes re subdivision, and where appropriate to the context, related to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
Swale: A depression in the ground which channels runoff. 
Tavern: An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary use. 
Tract: An area, parcel, piece of land, or property which is the subject of a development application. 
Trailer: Any vehicle or structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping or living quarters, or the conduct of any business, trade or occupation, or use as selling or advertising device, or use of storage or conveyance for chattel, tools, equipment or machinery, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and streets propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power. This term shall include, but not be limited to: automobiles, motorcycles, boat utility trailers, trailer coaches and manufactured homes. 
Trailer, camping: Shall mean any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel at legal speed limits without special permit which is intended for temporary living. 
Townhouses: Attached houses in a row or group, each house separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by fire walls and having fee simple title. 
Variance: A device which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions of a zoning ordinance when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money. 
Waste transfer station: A facility used for the temporary storage and collection of waste materials. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building or building group lying to the front, rear, or side of a building extending to the nearest lot line. 
Zone: A specifically delineated area or district in a municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia as adopted and amended. 
DIVISION 112. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 112.1. - Objectives and purpose. 
[A.]  This article is to establish requirements for the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs in order to protect and promote the health, safety, welfare, and general well being of the citizens of the City of Ball Ground. The zoning regulations of the placement, construction, maintenance of buildings and structures are a valid use of the police power, including the regulation of the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs. Signs must ordinarily be considered structures, and are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. The intent of this article to regulate the size, height and number of signs in such a manner as to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the county while promoting traffic safety without causing unsafe conditions. The City of Ball Ground will only oversee the number of signs, height, size and placement of signs with one freestanding sign per parcel of land. The City of Ball Ground makes no determination or permits signs in regard to on-site or off-site locations. With these objectives and purposes in mind, the intention of this article is to authorize the use of signs that: 
(1)  Are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural characteristics. 
(2)  Are legible and compatible with the type of lawful activities to which the signs pertain in such a manner as to express the identity of the individual properties and/or of the city as a whole. 
[B.]  In addition, the regulation of signs within the city is necessary and in the public interest: 
(1)  To protect property values within the city. 
(2)  To protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed or situated signs. 
(3)  To promote the economic well being of Ball Ground by creating a favorable physical image. 
(4)  To improve the legibility and effectiveness of all permitted signs. 
(5)  To allow individuals equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote their products and services without discrimination. 
(6)  To eliminate excessive signage. 
(7)  To protect the right of citizens to enjoy Ball Ground's natural scenic beauty. 
(8)  To encourage the economic development within the city. 
(9)  To regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property. 
(10)  To preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in Ball Ground. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.2. - Jurisdiction and applicability of code requirements. 
A.  This article shall apply to all properties within the incorporated areas of Ball Ground, Georgia. This article shall not relate to the copy or message on a sign within the incorporated areas of Ball Ground. 
B.  All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Ball Ground. 
C.  If any provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this ordinance or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard takes precedence. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.3. - Variances. 
Variances from the provisions of this article may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the Ball Ground Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in the Ball Ground Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.4. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this ordinance have the meanings defined in this section. In addition, words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the county shall be given the meanings as set forth in such ordinance. 
Abandoned sign : A sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona-fide business, lessor, owner, product or service where such sign and/or sign structure is located. 
Advertise : To call the attention of the public to a product, business and/or event. 
Advertising device : Any structure or device situated on or attached to real property that is erected or intended for the purpose of advertising. 
Air- and gas-filled device : Any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure. 
Animated sign : Any sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever. Any sign that contains or uses for illumination any light(s) or lighting device(s) that change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part automatically. 
Area of sign (copy area): The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Banner: A sign hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. This excludes flags, emblems, and insignia of political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations providing that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for non-commercial purposes. 
Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Bench sign : A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Billboards: Freestanding signs or structures for the display of advertisements in public places or highways. All regulations relating to freestanding signs should apply. 
Building marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building, the date and incidental information about its construction and is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
Building sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building other than a freestanding sign. 
Canopy: Any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Canopy sign: Any sign attached to, or made a part of the front, side, or top of a canopy. 
Commemorative signs: Any sign that honors the memory of or serves as a memorial to commemorate. 
Commercial message: Any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Commercial office center: A single parcel of land containing two (2) or more businesses or establishments, including all forms of retail, wholesale and services. 
Construction sign: A sign announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project. 
Copy: The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Directional sign: An unofficial or non-standard traffic control sign, containing no commercial message except logos, intended to direct or regulate the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. This includes, but is not limited to, "enter", "exit", "drive through", and directional arrow signs. These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building. 
Directory sign: A sign, which gives the name and/or occupation of the occupants of a building or identifies the particular use of a building. 
Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
Establishment: A commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business or financial entity. 
Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
Flashing sign: (See Animated sign. ) 
Freestanding sign: Monument sign. 
Frontage, building: The length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
Frontage, street: The length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
Ground sign: A freestanding sign which has no space between the signage copy area and the ground surface. 
Historic sign: Any animated neon sign over thirty (30) years old, any existing barber pole or any other sign so designated by the Historic Preservation Commission. Extensions, additions and embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign. 
Home occupation sign: A sign for a legally permitted home occupation on a residential parcel of land, with advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Identification sign: A sign depicting the name of a building and/or the address of an establishment on the premises where the sign is located. The name and/or address may be included as part of another signage type. 
Illuminated sign: A sign which contains an internal source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source. 
Incidental sign: A general information sign that is secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. This includes credit cards accepted, official notice of services as required by law, trade affiliations, business hours, "telephone", "self-service" and other related information. These signs are typically located on doors, windows or building walls. 
Instructional sign: A sign that has the purpose of giving instruction, direction or an order. 
Mansard sign: Any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to and within the limits of the building, not deemed to be a roof sign. 
Monument sign: A permanent sign placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure and constructed of stone, concrete, masonry, stucco or equal architectural material. 
Moving sign: (See Animated sign. ) 
Nonconforming sign (legal): Any advertising device or sign, including billboards, which were legally erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no longer, comply. Legal nonconforming signs require just compensation under the Highway Beautification Act for removal. 
Nonprofit activity: An activity, project, operation or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Painted wall sign: Any sign that is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Parcel (lot)/(business lot): Any standard lot or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a recorded legal instrument and is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership. The said parcel being duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, Cherokee County. 
Permanent sign: A sign permanently affixed to a building or the ground. 
Person: Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Political sign: A sign identifying and urging voter support for or in opposition to a particular issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
Portable sign: Any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, that is designed to move from one place to another. 
Premises: An area of land with appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
Principle building: The building with the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory are not considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign: Any sign affixed to a building or wall, which horizontally extends more than twelve inches beyond the surface of a building or wall. 
Public service sign: A sign designed to render a public service such as "time and temperature" and "flashing news" signs. 
Real estate sign: A temporary sign erected by the owner, or agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or sale. 
Residential district: Includes all land zoned R-12, R-15, R-20, R-40, RM-4, CBD and TND. 
Revolving sign: (See Animated sign. ) 
Roof sign: Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roof line. 
Roof sign (integral): Any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a normal roof structure of any design. No part of the sign can extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof and no part of the sign can be separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sidewalk, sandwich or a-frame sign: A sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation, which is usually two-sided. 
Sign: Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which 'is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or any emblem, painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
Sign face: The portion of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
Sign number: For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related and composed, to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component is considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign and both sign faces being less than 42 inches apart shall be construed as a single sign. 
Sign structure: Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Snipe sign: A sign of any material that is attached in anyway to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. Snipe signs do not include "keep out", "posted" or "no trespassing" signs. 
Street: Any public or private right-of-way for automobile use. This excludes alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
Street frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Subdivision sign: Any sign designed to identify a subdivision, neighborhood, or residential complex. 
Traffic control sign: A standard sign or electronic device (such as a traffic signal, stop sign, one way, handicap, no parking, fire lane, etc., for the purpose of directing or regulating traffic and/or pedestrians. 
Under canopy sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (including awnings and marquees), is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building, and whose copy is not clearly visible from a public right-of-way. 
Unlawful sign (illegal sign): Any sign erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this ordinance or previously adopted ordinance or code. A permitted sign which has not been properly erected in accordance with the permit application and approved sign permit or an otherwise lawful and permitted sign that has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment and so declared by the building official. 
Wall face: A measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall sign: Any sign affixed or attached to a wall of a building, extending no more than 12" beyond the wall and which displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign: Any sign, excluding identification and incidental signs, placed inside or upon a window, containing a commercial message, and intended to be seen from the exterior. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.5. - General provisions. 
112.5-1.  Permitting requirements. 
A.  Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, a person or firm may not legally post, display, enlarge, erect, move or substantially change a sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Administrator or his designee. A change in the copy only of a sign or advertising device does not constitute a substantial change. 
B.  Permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the Administrator or his designee upon forms furnished by the city. Applications shall describe and justify the following: 
1.  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this ordinance. 
2.  The value of the sign. 
3.  The street address and zoning designation of the property where the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
4.  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
5.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
6.  Written consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement of the sign. 
7.  A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the Standard Building Code as adopted by the City of Ball Ground. The Administrator or his designee may require additional information on such sketch or print to insure compliance with this ordinance. 
8.  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
9.  All applicants for electrical signs must obtain an electrical permit. 
10.  A written agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
C.  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the Administrator or his designee and permit fees have been paid as adopted by the Mayor and City Council and as amended from time to time. 
D.  Permit expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of two (2) months from the date of issuance and completed within six (6) months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful with further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
E.  Identification label. With each sign permit, the Administrator or his designee shall issue a label bearing the same number as the sign permit with which it is issued. The duty of the permittee or his agent is to affix such to the sign or its supporting structure in such a manner as to be visible from a street right-of-way. 
112.5-2.  Construction, maintenance requirements. 
A.  Erecting or placing any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance is unlawful. 
B.  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in constant repair. Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and maintained at all times so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. 
C.  No trash shall be allowed to accumulate in the area around a sign and all weeds shall be kept out. 
D.  Removal of abandoned signs. Any structure formerly used as a sign, but not in use for any other purpose, must be removed by the owner of the property within thirty (30) days after written notification from a designated official of the City of Ball Ground or sixty (60) days after its use as a valid sign has ceased. After which time, the city may cause the removal of the sign at the property owner's expense. 
112.5-3.  Lighting requirements. 
A.  Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected or maintained. 
B.  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. Lighting shall not be directed skyward. 
C.  No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within fifty (50) feet of any residential district or dwelling. 
D.  Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect shall be excluded from all districts provided, however, time and weather informational signs, official warning or regulatory signs shall be exempt from this requirement. 
E.  No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign in such a manner as to confuse or mislead the motoring public or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
112.5-4.  Height requirements. 
The height requirements of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. Cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade, at the base of the sign, is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public road. In addition, the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower. Refer to Table 11.1 for specific height limits and requirements. 
112.5-5.  Additional requirements. 
A.  The owner shall remove any sign relating to a business or other use located on the same lot within 30 days after vacating the premises. 
B.  Real estate signs shall be removed within ten days of the sale, rental or lease of the property advertised; however, the use of a "SOLD" attachment to a sign pending the completion of a sales transaction shall not be construed as a sale. 
C.  No sign shall be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of escape or ventilation, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; nor shall any sign be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape. 
D.  No sign shall be erected, maintained, painted, drawn or attached to any utility pole, fence, rock, tree or any other natural feature. 
E.  It shall be unlawful to post any signs or advertisements on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the written consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be included with the sign permit application. 
F.  Signs erected for the purpose of identifying a premises shall not also contain advertising except that of the use identified. 
G.  All signs shall be located on or over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this article. 
H.  All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
I.  All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with National Electrical Code specification. In no case shall any sign be installed within five (5) feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
J.  Corner visibility clearance. In any distance, no sign or sign structure (above the height of three feet) shall be maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extending of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign structure, if not more than ten (10) inches in diameter located on a corner lot where services are provided to the motoring public, may be located within the required corner visibility area. This is provided if all other requirements of this article are met and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least ten (10) feet above the ground level. 
K.  All signs erected and permitted in the City of Ball Ground shall contain within the copy area of said sign the following: "in the City of Ball Ground." 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.6. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited within the incorporated portions of the City of Ball Ground: 
1.  Signs, which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws. 
2.  Signs, which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws. 
3.  Swinging or projecting signs that exceed 8 square feet in size must clear the sidewalk by 9 feet with a max height above sidewalk not to exceed 13 feet. Signs cannot extend beyond the curb of the road. 
5.  Rotating or animated signs involving motion or sound including those that flash, blink, change image, or show any form of movement, excluding historic signs and those officially designated for public service. 
5.  Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings. 
6.  Portable signs (mobile, trailer). 
7.  Flags, banners, streamers, tethered balloons or other inflatable signs or figures, except as authorized by this regulation. 
8.  Signs that make use of the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or similar words, phrases, symbols or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse automobile traffic except construction signs or barricades and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 
9.  Courtesy benches, waste containers or other forms of street furniture on which advertising is displayed. 
10.  Snipe signs. 
11.  Search lights and beacons. 
12.  Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type, which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. 
13.  Signs that emit visible smoke vapor particles or odor. 
14.  Except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance, any sign which advertises or otherwise directs attention to a product, service or other activity, event, person, institution or business, which may or may not be identified by a "brand" name is not permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.7. - Exempt signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following on-premises signs may be erected without securing a permit. Such exempt signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number or size of signs on a zoning lot. However, the signs must comply with all other applicable sections of this article and applicable codes and regulations. The erection of any sign not listed in this section shall require a permit. 
1.  One (1) professional name plate for each establishment. Each professional nameplate shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
2.  One (1) separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of two (2) square feet. The purpose of this sign is to identify the establishment's property number (address), suite or unit number, post office number, etc. 
3.  One (1) informational bulletin board for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when located on the premises of said institution and affixed to a building wall. Bulletin boards may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be located in such a manner that said bulletin board will satisfy the required setback requirements for the zoning district in which the bulletin board is located. 
4.  Traffic, directional, warning or official notices or signs owned by any public agency or office, ["]no hunting,["] ["]no trespassing["] and ["]no public access["] signs. 
5.  One (1) non-illuminated temporary real estate sign per street frontage and provided as follows: 
(a)  Maximum sign area shall be limited to five 5 square feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet in all residential districts. 
(b)  Multiple listing strips, sale pending and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area and maximum height requirements. 
(c)  One (1) on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area with a maximum height of six (6) feet, may be allowed in addition to the above requirements. 
(d)  All the temporary real estate signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after ownership or occupancy has changed. 
(e)  In agricultural zoned districts with parcels greater than 10 acres, the maximum sign area is 32 square feet with a maximum height of 8 feet. Parcels in agricultural zoned districts with less than 10 acres are allowed a maximum sign area of 5 square feet and a maximum height of 5 feet. 
(f)  Real estate brochures/information boxes may be allowed with a maximum of 1 brochure/information box per parcel of land. 
6.  Flags and insignia subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Limited to official flags of the United States, State of Georgia, Cherokee County or the City of Ball Ground. 
(b)  Flagpoles shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height and flags must be flown in accordance with standard protocol. 
7.  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
8.  Non-advertising directional signs or symbols not exceeding two (2) square feet designed to direct and inform the public as to location or direction to a parcel of private property (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, no trespassing, service areas or loading and unloading areas). 
9.  Signs appearing on vending machines are limited to signs referring to the product contained within or on the device. 
10.  Gasoline pump signs shall be allowed on gasoline pumps so as to provide required information, such as gallons, price, octane rating, and type of fuel. As the trade name of the business is often incorporated into the name of the different types of fuel, said trade name and any associated symbols shall be allowed on the pumps as flat signs not to exceed three (3) square feet in area per sign face, or a total of six (6) square feet per pump. 
11.  Political signs as follows: 
[(a)](A)  The sign shall not be displayed more than thirty (30) days prior to the primary election; general election or referendum it concerns and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election has been held. The owner of the property on which the sign is located and the candidate will be responsible for removing the sign. 
[(b)](B)  The sign shall be located entirely on private property. Signs are prohibited, in whole or in part, on any public lands or public right-of-way and must not be attached to any other sign, utility pole, tree, rock, or other form of vegetation or natural feature. 
[(c)](C)  The number of signs displayed shall be restricted to one (1) sign per parcel of property per candidate. 
[(d)](D)  Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
12.  Signs for temporary garage sales, yard sales, and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions: 
[(a)](A)  On-premises signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per parcel of property. 
[(b)](B)  The maximum area of the sign shall be six (6) square feet and the maximum height shall be four (4) feet. 
[(c)](C)  Signs must be removed at the close of the sale. 
[(d)](D)  Weekend Directional Signs (WEDS): 
Definition: WEDS shall convey directions to a specific, noncommercial place or event. For example: Premises that are for sale or lease, a church or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales, estate sales, etc. 
Zoning districts: WEDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
Time allowed: WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. The responsibility to remove all WEDS prior to 7:00 a.m. Monday is of the sign owner. 
No permit req. WEDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. 
Identification on sign: Each WEDS shall be legibly marked with the name of the owner. If a party other than the owner agrees to be responsible for the removal of the sign, then the responsible party's name may be substituted. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one face of the WEDS and in letters of at least one-half (½) inch in height. 
Construction: WEDS shall not exceed four (4) square feet of sign area and three (3) feet in height and may be double-faced. WEDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. WEDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, street light poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. WEDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
Location: There shall be only one WEDS for any given place, activity, or event per three hundred (300) feet of road frontage. No WEDS shall be located closer than one (1) foot from the right-of-way. All WEDS must be placed on private property with the owner's permission. 
13.  Signs located on the inside of windows intended for the purpose of disseminating information about special sales or promotional campaigns, provided that such signs are temporary in nature and are constructed of such materials that clearly indicates that they are temporary. 
14.  Works of art which do not contain a commercial message. 
15.  Historic signs. 
16.  Municipal signs. 
17.  Signs on public transportation vehicles. 
18.  Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. This may include signs for realtors, surveyors, engineers, plumbers, electricians, delivery trucks, lawn service, etc. 
19.  Holiday lights, flags for decorative purposes, including small flagpoles, and other decorations, which do not require a permit and must not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
Sec. 112.8. - Permitted signs by type and zoning district. 
1.  Freestanding businesses are allowed three (3) signs. Only one of the three can be a freestanding sign. A business within a shopping center can have a maximum of two (2) signs. The shopping center is allowed the freestanding sign. 
2.  Churches. In residential districts, freestanding signs will be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet with a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. In non-residential districts, (AG, Commercial/Industrial) freestanding signs will be limited to fifty (50) square feet with a maximum height of ten (10) feet. 
3.  Residential districts. In residential districts, freestanding signs will be limited to four (4) square feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet. In agricultural districts (AG), freestanding signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet with a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
4.  Subdivisions. Signs for the identification of a subdivision must be monumental (brick, stone, stucco or masonry). Two signs are allowed on either side of the entrance with the height a maximum of ten feet. The copy area has a total maximum of 64 feet for both or a maximum of 32 square feet per side entrance. There are to be no signs on islands. However, one double-faced sign is allowed with a maximum of 50 square feet. 
5.  In non-residential districts, (Commercial/Industrial), freestanding signs will be limited to a hundred twenty (120) square feet with a maximum height of thirty-five (35) square feet. 
6.  Temporary on-premises signs. Decorative flags, banners, balloons, bunting or stick in type signs for celebrations, conventions, commemorations, grand-opening events or other special events or sales when specifically recognized by the City of Ball Ground for a prescribed period of two weeks, not to exceed 2 weeks in any 4 week period or a total of 8 weeks in any calendar year. 
(a)  A temporary sign must not have flashing lights or copy, moveable parts or colored lights that may closely resemble those of traffic signals, emergency vehicles or airport beacons. 
(b)  A temporary sign with copy must not be confused with authorized traffic signs or which may use words, phrases, symbols or characters that may interfere with, mislead or confuse motorists. 
(c)  Permits must be obtained from the City of Ball Ground for all temporary signs. 
(d)  No more than two temporary signs per business per parcel of property are permitted at any given time. 
7.  If the parcel has two street frontages, two freestanding signs are allowed in any zoning district. 
8.  If courtesy benches or waste containers are donated by a business, advertisement is allowed only for that particular business provided no more than 15% of the total surface area is covered by advertising. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2014) 
DIVISION 113.0. - CONSERVATION NEIGHBORHOOD REGULATION[S] 

Sec. 113.1. - Purposes. 
A.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
B.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
J.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
L.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
Sec. 113.2. - General regulations. 
A.  Applicability of regulations. This Conservation Subdivision option is available in the following: RE, R-40, R-30 and R-20[ zones] as a use by right. [The ]Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
B.  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
C.  Housing determination. The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the City of Ball Ground: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
(a)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet of contiguous area: 
(b)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(c)  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(d)  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
(e)  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities 
(2)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
Sec. 113.3. - Application requirements. 
A.  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed Open Space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than 10-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Section 4[113.4] of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location f protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
B.  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in Section 4, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
C.  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in Section 4[113.4], shall be placed on the Open Space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
D.  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the Development Code and Zoning Ordinance of the City of Ball Ground. 
Sec. 113.4. - Open space. 
A.  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
B.  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40% of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered Primary Conservation Areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the Applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
(a)  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
(b)  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet wide along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(c)  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(d)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
(f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered Secondary Conservation Areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
(a)  Important historic sites; 
(b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
(c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
(d)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ride lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
(e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres, contiguous area; and 
(f)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above ground utility rights of way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trials may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non protected natural areas that would be candidates for the inclusion as a part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
C.  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trials, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10 percent of the total open space and are not located within Primary Conservation Areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts and such activities are not conducted within Primary Conservation Areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
D.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
E.  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowner's Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowner's Association is the owner, the Homeowner's Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a Plan for Management of Open Space and Common Facilities ("plan") that: 
(a)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
(b)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
(c)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the Ball Ground City Council; and 
(d)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Ball Ground may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowner's Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
F.  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following; 
(a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation oriented non profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Ball Ground, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Ball Ground shall be included in the easement. 
(b)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a government entity; or 
(c)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City of Ball Ground. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the Applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
[AMENDMENT] 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BALL GROUND, GEORGIA, AS AMENDED, TO AMEND DIVISION 104, DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES OF THE CITY OF BALL GROUND COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT CODE, TO INCREASE THE PROVISION OF ZONING DISTRICTS; TO ENHANCE THE FLEXIBILITY OF ZONING AND USES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE OF THE CITY OF BALL GROUND, GEORGIA; TO PROVIDE FOR SEVERABILITY; TO REPEAL CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, and by the authority thereof: 

Sec. 1. 
That division 104 of the Comprehensive Development Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, as amended, is hereby further amended by inserting the following zoning district uses and regulations of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, article 7, adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, as now written and as may be amended in later editions, are adopted and incorporated by reference: 
General agricultural district (AG). The purpose of this district is to maintain the integrity of agricultural activities predominate in the rural area of Cherokee County. The regulations are to discourage the subdivision of land for urban development and to encourage the maintenance of the general rural characteristics of openness, low density residential use, appropriate agribusiness and extensive agricultural and livestock production (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-1). 
Estate residential district (R-80, R-60). The purpose of this district is to permit residential development in those areas that are expected to become more nearly urban in character. The areas involved are generally in transition from agricultural to residential development and are considered appropriate for low density residential development (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-2). 
Single-family residential districts (R-30). The purpose of these residential districts is to enable residential development of a low density urban character. The regulations are designed to permit and encourage residential development in areas where urbanization is taking place (REF: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-3). 
Single-family residential (R-15, RD-3, RZL- Zero-Lot Line Residential). The purpose of these residential districts is to permit and encourage development of high density single-family residential uses in a moderately spacious surrounding. These development districts shall be served with an approved community water system and a central sewerage system (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-5). 
Single-family attached residential districts (RA, RTH). The purpose of this district is to provide for intermediate housing types and densities between single-family detached and multi-family dwellings. Such development may include duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes or townhouses to be located in the urban portion or suburban portion of the county where apartment buildings would not be compatible. Innovative design with cluster development is encouraged. Such development districts are intended to be served with central sewerage system except for lot sizes exceeding 20,000 square feet (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-6). 
Multi-family residential district (RM-10, RM-16). The purpose of the residential districts is to permit development of high density multi-family residential dwellings. These zoning districts are to be located where public water supply and sewerage facilities are available or can be obtained and where there is convenient access to collector streets or major thoroughfares. The use of these districts can be developed as a transition zone between residential districts and commercial districts (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-7). 
Highway commercial district (HC). The purpose of this district is to provide an area for commercial uses, which require a location to be accessible to major highways and arterial roadways. Districts are located at major intersections of these highways. Development should be limited to the needs of the traveling public (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-12). 
Office distribution district (OD). The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for offices with related warehouse operations and distribution facilities, but not involving the manufacturing, fabrication, repair or servicing of any commodity or product. Light appliance and electronic equipment repair and assembly is allowed. Limited retail sales may be permitted if accessory to a major use. This district should be accessible to principal or major arterial. Buffer zones with landscaping are required to ensure the compatibility of operating activities with the surrounding area (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-13). 
Heavy industrial district (HI). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for industrial operations of all types. This district should be accessible to railroads and major highways. Residential and retail uses are prohibited. The district is separated from residential districts by natural barriers wherever possible and buffer zones in other cases (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-15). 
Planned industrial development (PID). The Planned Industrial District is a floating district which may be located in any light industrial area if it meets all the standards for planned industrial activities. The purpose of this district is to provide flexible use and coordinated development of light industries, warehouse processing, sales, offices and limited service activities within a well-planned environment. This district should be accessible to a major arterial. A concept plan is required before a development permit is granted to ensure compatibility of the proposed development with the surrounding area. Districts are located in areas which do not create public nuisances or endanger public health, safety or the general welfare (Ref: Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, Article 7, 7.1-16). 
For the additional regulations, standards, and dimensional requirements that exclusively govern the AG, R-80, R-60, R-30, R-15, RD-3, RZL, RA, RTH, RM-10, RM-16, HC, OD, HI, and PID Zoning Districts, please see Appendix A and the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance, adopted by reference, now and as amended. 
Permitted uses in the AG, R-30 and R-15 Zoning Districts shall also be governed by Division 104 of the City of Ball Ground Comprehensive Development Code, where applicable with the more restrictive description taking authority. 
Sec. 3. 
That the Comprehensive Development Code of the City of Ball Ground, Georgia, as amended, is hereby further amended by creating, "Appendix A" which incorporates by reference, articles 6 & 7 of the Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance in its entirety, adopted by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, as now written and as may be amended in later editions, for the exclusive and sole purpose of regulating the standards, uses, and dimensional requirements of the AG, R-80, R-60, R-30, R-15, RD-3, RZL, RA, RTH, RM-10, RM-16, HC, OD, HI, and PID zoning districts. 
Sec. 4. 
The Cherokee County Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference, in its entirety, as now written and as may be amended in later editions by the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners, for the exclusive and sole purpose of regulating the following zoning districts: AG, R-80, R-60, R-30, R-15, RD-3, RZL, RA, RTH, RM-10, RM-16., HC, OD, HI, and PID zoning districts. 
Sec. 5. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction or if the provisions of any part of this ordinance as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this ordinance not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council to provide for separable and divisible parts and he does hereby adopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
Sec. 6. 
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon approval by the mayor and council. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2010 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2010 Code included herein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within the Code of Ordinances of legislation included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 