CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF KINGSLAND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 14, 1994 
Effective: February 15, 1994 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KINGSLAND, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Dr. C. Grayson Day, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Alex Blount 
James Galloway 
Michael McClain 
Lamar L. Stokes 
City Council 
____________ 
Linda M. O'Shaughnessy 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KINGSLAND, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Keith Dixon 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lemon Dawson 
Jimmy Johnson 
John Q. Liles 
Kenneth E. Smith 
City Council 
____________ 
Andrew Taylor 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dorothy Peeples 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1968 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council through October 25, 1993. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Andrew A. Taylor, City Attorney, and Ms. Mara S. Peterson, Director of Community Planning and Development, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1994-1 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Kingsland, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Kingsland, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsland, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 24, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 25, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 180 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 25, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 15, 1994. 
Passed and Adopted by the Council this 14th day of February, 1994. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Council of the City of Kingsland held on the 14th day of February, 1994. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, as adopted by the General Assemble. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of such a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation; powers; continuation of ordinances, officers. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority of the same, that from and after the passage of this of this [sic] Act the inhabitants of the territory embraced in the following boundaries to wit: The territory hereby incorporated is all of the territory embraced in a circle extending one mile in all directions from the center of King Street and the center of the main line of the Seaboard Air-Line Railway at the point of intersection of said street and railway-track; be and they are hereby incorporated under the name and style of the City of Kingsland, and the City of Kingsland is hereby chartered and made a city under said corporate name and by name is established, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, and are hereby vested with all the rights, powers, and privileges incident to municipal corporations in this State, or cities thereof, and all rights, powers, titles, property, easements, and hereditaments now belonging and in any wise appertaining to said City of Kingsland, or the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland, under the old charter as heretofore incorporated, shall be and are hereby vested in the City of Kingsland as created by this Act, and the said City of Kingsland, in Camden County Georgia, created, established, and declared by this Act, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, plead and be impleaded, have and use a common seal, make and enact through its mayor and council such ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions for the transaction of its business and for the welfare and proper government of said city as mayor and council may deem best and not inconsistent with the laws of Georgia and the United States; and the said City of Kingsland shall be capable in law to purchase, hold, enjoy, receive, possess, and retain in perpetuity, or for any term of years, any estate or estates real or personal, lands, tenements, hereditaments of any kind whatever, within or without the corporate limits of said city for corporate purposes; and to sell, alien, exchange, or release the same, or any part thereof. The said City of Kingsland, created by this Act, is hereby made a body corporate for the legal debts and liabilities and undertakings, of whatever kind or nature, of said City of Kingsland, or the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland heretofore incorporated; and all ordinances now in forces in the City of Kingsland and enacted by the municipal authorities of the City of Kingsland, or by the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland under the old charter and not repugnant to this charter or the laws of Georgia, shall be and are hereby continued in force in said City of Kingsland incorporated by this Act, and the present Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Kingsland shall continue in office as the Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Kingsland, incorporated under this Act, until their present terms expire, or their successors are elected and qualified under this charter, and all other officers of the City of Kingsland under the old charter until their present terms expire or their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 1; 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 192), page 1575, § 1) 
Editor's note— 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 192), page 1575, § 1, provided as follows: 
"The object and purpose of this Act is to extend the corporate limits of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, so as to embrace all of the territory within a circle two miles in diameter, the center of said circle being herein before set out in this section of this Act." 
Sec. 1.1. - City manager. 
(a)  A city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of all council members for a term set by contract with the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive, administrative, and managerial qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect to the duties of the office set forth in this section. At the time of appointment, he or she need not be a resident of the city or the state, but during the tenure of office he or she shall reside within the geographical limits of the 1606th District G. M., Camden County, Georgia. 
(c)  No council member shall receive this appointment during the term for which the member was elected nor within one year after the expiration of that term. 
(d)  The council may remove the city manager by such procedure as may be set out in the city manager's contract with the city. 
(e)  The council shall appoint a noncouncil member to serve as acting city manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the city manager during any temporary absence or disability, which disability shall be acknowledged by a motion adopted by a majority vote of all council members present. 
(f)  The city manager shall: 
(1)  Be the chief administrative officer of the city; 
(2)  Be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city; 
(3)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by state law, this charter, or personnel ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Prepare and submit an operating and capital improvements budget annually to the council; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the council, at the end of each fiscal year, a report on the administrative and financial activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(6)  Make any other reports on the operation of any aspect of the city operation as the council may request by motion; and 
(7)  Perform any other duties and exercise any other powers as directed by ordinance consistent with the charter and state law. 
(g)  The city manager shall appoint and remove all department heads with the consent of the council adopted by motion and may personally serve as department head of any and all departments. 
(h)  The city manager shall enter into contracts only with the consent of the council adopted by motion or as authorized by ordinance. 
(i)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the council and its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any city officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 446), page 4698, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Mayor and council generally; other officers. 
Be it further enacted, that the municipal government of said city shall consist of a mayor and four councilmen, who shall constitute the legislative body for said city, and all of whom shall be elected on the day hereinafter fixed. All of said officers shall hold their offices for a term of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified; each of whom shall take an appropriate oath provided by ordinance before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, which may be administered by any person authorized to administer oaths under the laws of this State; that the council may elect or appoint such subordinate officers as may become necessary at any time for the enforcement of the provisions of this charter, or any ordinance passed by said council in the pursuance of the rights and powers herein conferred; all of which subordinate officers as may be thus appointed or elected shall be deemed and held to be lawful officers of this State and the city of Kingsland. All of such subordinate officers shall hold their offices at the will of the council, and receive such salary as may be fixed by the council; each of whom shall take an appropriate oath before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, and shall give such bond as the council may require, payable to the City of Kingsland conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 2; 1931 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), page 855, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— 1931 Ga. Laws (Act No. 210), page 855, §§ 1, 2, provide as follows: 
"Sec. 1. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of same, that at the election to be held in and for the City of Kingsland on the first Wednesday in January, 1932, for the election of a mayor and four councilmen for said city, said mayor and councilmen shall be elected for a term of two years instead of for one year as is now provided in section 2 of the charter of said city." 
"Sec. 2. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that at all future elections held in and for said city for the election of mayor and councilmen that [sic] the term for which they shall be elected shall be for two years, except for the filling of vacancies during the term for which they are elected." 
Sec. 3. - Elections; council posts. 
(a)  The municipal general election for the City of Kingsland shall be conducted on the second Tuesday of December of each year in the city court room or council chambers. The polls shall remain open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on the day of said election. 
(b)  For the purposes of electing candidates to the office of councilman, positions of membership on the council shall be numbered as Posts 1 through 4, respectively. Candidates offering for election to the council shall designate by number that position on the council for which they offer as a candidate. In the general election conducted in 1977, candidates who are elected to Posts 1 and 2 shall serve for an initial term of office of three years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. In said election, candidates who are elected to Posts 3 and 4 shall serve for an initial term of two years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to such councilmen shall be elected in the municipal general election which shall be conducted immediately prior to the expiration of their respective terms of office to serve for a term of office for two years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(c)  The term of office of the mayor shall be for two years and until his successor shall be duly elected and qualified. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 3; 1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 562), page 2108, § 1; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 632), page 2263, § 1; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 907), page 2833, § 1) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 21-1-541.1 (Terms of office for city officials elected at general municipal elections shall be four years) 
Sec. 4. - Qualifications of voters. 
Be it further enacted, that all male citizens qualified to vote for members of the House of Representatives in the General Assembly of Georgia, and who have paid all taxes imposed and demanded by the authorities of the city, and shall have resided six months within the jurisdictional limits of said city, and no other person, shall qualified to vote at said election. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 4) 
Editor's note— The current law on electors' qualifications is found in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-216. 
Sec. 5. - Registration of voters. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council shall cause the city clerk of the said City of Kingsland to register the names of all voters who are qualified to vote under the charter of this city, and under the laws of this State, for municipal officers of the City of Kingsland. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 5) 
Editor's note— The current law on registration of voters is found in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210. 
Sec. 6. - Registration book; notice of registration. 
Be it further enacted, that the said city clerk shall provide a suitable book alphabetically arranged, in which to register said qualified voters, and said clerk shall give notice in any newspaper published in said city at least sixty days preceding the election, or shall post at three or more public places, one of which shall be at the court-house door for holding mayors court, a notice that his looks are open for the registration of all voters who are qualified to vote for municipal officers in said city. Said registration book shall be closed at least one week before the election. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 6) 
Sec. 7. - Application for registration; oath. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of all persons in said city who desire to register to apply to the city clerk in person, and to furnish said city clerk evidence of their qualification for registration: and in case the city clerk is not satisfied as to the qualifications of the applicant, he may require the following oath, or affirmation: "I do swear (or affirm) that I am a qualified voter for members of the House of Representatives in the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, from the County of Camden, and have paid all taxes legally imposed upon me by the City of Kingsland; so help me God." The city clerk of said city is hereby authorized to administer said oath, and shall keep a record of the same upon the registration book, and may refuse to register said persons as may decline to take the oath aforesaid. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 7) 
Sec. 8. - Violations. 
Be it further enacted, that any person voting illegally in the municipal election of the City of Kingsland, or falsely swearing (or affirming) in order to register, or otherwise violating any provisions of this Act, shall on conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1065 of the Criminal Code of Georgia of 1910. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 8) 
Editor's note— The current law on election offenses is found in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-560 et seq. 
Sec. 9. - Election managers; oath of voter. 
Be it further enacted, that said election shall be held under the superintendence of a justice of the peace and two freeholders, or three freeholders, who shall be appointed by the said mayor and council at least five days before the election; and each of said election managers shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath before some officer of this State, authorized by law to administer oaths, that he will faithfully and impartially conduct said election and will prevent all illegal voting to the best of his skill and power; and in case the said managers of said election shall have any reasonable doubt as to the qualification of any persons who desire to vote therein, they shall have the power to administer the following oath: "You do solemnly swear (or affirm) that you have attained the age of 21 years; that you are a citizen of the United States, and are qualified to vote for members of the House of Representatives in the General Assembly of Georgia, from the County of Camden; that you have resided for the last six months within the City of Kingsland, and have paid all taxes legally imposed and demanded of you by said City; so help you God." Any person who shall take said oath and shall swear falsely shall be deemed guilty of perjury, and be punished upon prosecution and conviction as prescribed by the laws of said State for the punishment of perjury. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 9) 
Editor's note— The current law on poll officers is found in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90 et seq. 
Sec. 10. - Plurality vote. 
Be it further enacted, that the persons who have received the highest number of votes at said election for mayor, councilmen, and city treasurer, respectively, shall be declared duly elected. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 10) 
Sec. 11. - Vacancies. 
Be it further enacted, that in case of any vacancy in the office of mayor and council, either by death, resignation, failure to elect, removal from office, removal from the city, or any other cause, the mayor shall order a new election to fill said vacancy, giving ten days notice thereby by publication in any newspaper that may be published in said city, or by posting a notice of the same, for at least ten days, in three or more public places in said city, one of which shall be posted at the door of the courtroom where the mayor's court is held in said city; and the registration for the last preceding election shall be applicable thereto. In case of the death of the mayor, his resignation, removal from office, or removal from the city, or a vacancy from any other cause in the office of the mayor the mayor pro tem, shall in like manner order an election for filling said vacancy, giving similar notice of the election to be held; provided, that if any vacancy shall occur within three months next preceding the regular election, no election shall be called to fill said vacancy; in that event, if the vacancy is in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem shall, upon taking the oath of mayor, serve out the unexpired term, and the said council shall elect a new mayor pro tem. If the vacancy is in the office of councilmen, there shall be no election to fill out the same unless the council is reduced by vacancy to less than a quorum, which a hereby declared to consist of three councilmen besides the mayor or acting mayor. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 11) 
Editor's note— The former mayor's court is now known as the "municipal court." (O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1) 
Sec. 12. - Certification of votes; oath of office. 
Be it further enacted, that after the votes for mayor and councilmen at each election therefor for said city shall have been counted by the managers, and the result determined, they shall cause two certified copies of the tally-sheets to be made out, one of which shall be handed to the mayor, and the other shall be retained by the managers; and as soon as the mayor of said city shall be informed of the results of the election, he shall cause the persons as aforesaid to be notified of the fact, and the persons so elected shall attend on the first Monday thereafter at the council chamber at the regular meeting of the mayor and council, and the newly-elected mayor and each member of council shall take and subscribe before the clerk of some court of record of this State, or before an officer of said State authorized by law to administer oaths, the following oath: "I swear that I will faithfully and impartially demean myself as mayor (or councilman, as the case may be) during my continuance in office. I have not, in order to influence my election to this office, directly or indirectly promised my vote or support to any person or officer in the said government of the city of Kingsland, nor for any other office. I will not knowingly permit my vote in the election or appointment of any persons to a position in said government to be influenced by fear, favor, or the hope of reward, but in all things pertaining to my office I will be governed by what in my judgment is for the public good and for the best interest of said city; so help me God." 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 12) 
Sec. 13. - Abuse of office. 
Be it further enacted, that in case the mayor or any member of the council, while in office, shall be guilty of willful neglect, malpractice, or abuse of power conferred upon him, he shall be subject to indictment therefor in the superior court of Camden County, and on conviction shall be fined in a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars, which fine shall be paid to the city treasurer for the use of said city; and he shall, moreover, be removed from office upon conviction. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 13) 
Sec. 14. - Eligibility for office. 
Be it further enacted that no person shall be eligible as mayor or councilman or city treasurer of the City of Kingsland, unless such person is a qualified voter of said city at the time of his election to such office. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 14) 
Sec. 15. - Mayor; salary; powers and duties. 
Be it further enacted, that the Mayor of said city shall receive no salary unless same is fixed by unanimous vote of a full board of councilmen; and in the event a salary for mayor is fixed, it shall not exceed one hundred dollars annually, payable quarterly. The mayor, or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem, shall preside over all meetings of council. The mayor shall not have a vote except in case of a tie. When presiding the mayor pro tem shall have his regular vote, and in case of a tie shall have an additional vote to break the tie. The mayor shall have the veto power, and may veto any ordinance or resolution of the council, in which event the same shall not become a law unless subsequently passed over the veto by the vote of at least four councilmen, duly recorded on the minutes of council; but unless he shall file in writing with the city clerk his veto of any measure passed by council, with the reasons which impel him to withhold his assent, within four days of its passage, the same shall become a law just as if approved and signed by the mayor. The council shall not have power to override the veto of the mayor unless action on any veto is taken within sixty days after the mayor files his veto with the city clerk. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions, and rules of said city are faithfully executed. He shall have the general jurisdiction of all the affairs of the city, and to him all police officers and city employees under the direction of the mayor and council shall be directly and immediately subject. He shall have the power and authority to punish for contempt before the mayor and council by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail or calaboose for a period not exceeding four days, either or both, or in the alternative, the discretion of the mayor. It shall be the duty of the mayor to preserve the peace, and he may appoint special policemen to assist the marshal hereinafter provided for, when in his judgment it may be necessary. The mayor shall be an ex-officio justice of the peace so far as to enable and authorize him to issue warrants and conduct commitment trials for criminal offenses committed within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland, and he may commit offenders thus tried before him, as a court of inquiry, to the common jail of Camden County, or admit them to bail as in cases where a justice of the peace has power to commit or admit to bail. The mayor shall have the power and authority to remit or reduce fines or penalties imposed in his court on persons convicted therein for violating any of the laws or ordinances of said city; and he shall also have the authority to parole on good conduct persons convicted in the mayor's court, whenever in his judgment the same is advisable. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 15) 
Editor's note— The compensation of the members of the municipal governing body is determined under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 16. - Mayor pro tem. 
Be it further enacted, that at its first regular meeting upon organization the council shall elect one of their number mayor pro tem; and in case of the resignation, death, removal, disability or disqualification of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, shall take the oath as mayor and serve as mayor with all the rights, powers, and duties of the mayor in all respects until the vacancy in the office of mayor shall have been filled in the manner provided for in this charter. If the services of the mayor pro tem shall continue for as long as thirty days, he shall be compensated at the same rate and in the same manner that the mayor is paid, and such compensation shall be deducted from the salary of the mayor, unless said mayor's disqualifications or continued absence was from providential cause. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 16) 
Sec. 17. - Salary of councilmen. 
Be it further enacted, that the qualifications of the members of council shall be the same as those of the mayor, and they shall receive no salary unless same is provided for by unanimous vote of a full board of councilmen and concurred in by the mayor, and shall not exceed fifty dollars per year payable annually. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 17) 
Editor's note— The compensation of the members of the municipal governing body is determined under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 18. - City officers. 
Be it further enacted, that at its first regular meeting after qualification and upon organization, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland shall elect a city clerk, a city treasurer, and marshal for said city. They shall also elect at the same time and place, or as soon thereafter as practical, a city tax-receiver, which may be the same person as they elect as city clerk, and also a city tax collector, which may be the same person as was chosen as city treasurer. The qualifications for each of such subordinate officers herein provided for shall be the same as those for mayor and council; and they shall, upon assuming their duties, take and subscribe such oaths of office as the mayor and council may prescribe; and they shall each give bond in such sum as the mayor and council may direct, for the faithful performance of their duties and the making of a full and true account of all monies and funds coming into their hands from all sources as an officer of said city. The term of office for each of the subordinate officers provided for in this section shall be for a term of one year, or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 18) 
Sec. 19. - Duties of clerk. 
Be it further enacted, that the city clerk shall be the clerical officer of the Council, and shall attend all their meetings; he shall be the keeper of the seal of said city; he shall be ex-officio clerk of the mayor's or police court of said city, and attend its sessions; he shall be ex-officio clerk of the board of tax-assessors and the board of health of said city, and he shall be ex-officio clerk or secretary of any other board of said city created under the provisions of this Act, or that may be created or established under the laws and ordinances of the City of Kingsland. The duties of the said city clerk as clerk of the council and as ex-officio clerk of the police court, as ex-officio tax-receiver, as ex-officio clerk of the board of health, and as ex-officio clerk or secretary of any board or commission of said city, shall be such as are prescribed in this Act, or such as shall be prescribed under and by virtue of the laws or ordinances of said City of Kingsland or by the mayor and council thereof. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 19) 
Editor's note— The former mayor's court or police court is now known as the municipal court. (O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1) 
Sec. 20. - Duties of treasurer. 
Be it further enacted, that the city treasurer of the City of Kingsland shall make and keep a just and true account of all monies and funds coming into his hands from all sources as an officer of said city. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to receive and safely keep the monies and funds of the city that may come into his hands from every source; to keep separate accounts of the same as may be provided or required under and by the laws and ordinances of said city; he shall only pay out said funds in the way and manner as may be prescribed and provided for by and under the laws and ordinances of said city. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 20) 
Sec. 21. - Duties of tax receiver. 
Be it further enacted, that the duties of the city tax-receiver shall be to receive tax-returns of all property in said city, both real and personal, at such time and in such manner as the mayor and council may prescribe by ordinances or otherwise, and upon such blanks prescribed by the mayor and council of said city, and he shall have the authority to administer oaths to taxpayers on their return of property for taxation; and he shall deliver all such tax-returns over the tax-collector for said city. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 21) 
Sec. 22. - Duties of tax collector. 
Be it further enacted, that the duties of the tax-collector shall be to accept and receive all tax-returns made to the tax-receiver for said city; to make the calculation as to amount of taxes to be paid out by any property owner in said city, using the tax rate fixed by the mayor and council; to collect and receipt for all taxes of whatever kind levied, and turn the same over promptly to the treasurer of said city. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 22) 
Sec. 23. - City marshal. 
Be it further enacted, that at its first regular meeting and upon organization, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, the mayor and council shall elect a city marshal. They may also elect one or more assistants or city policemen, if in their judgment it may seem proper and necessary, at the same time providing for their compensation. The city marshal shall be elected for a term of one year. All such officers shall take and subscribe such oaths as the mayor and council may prescribe, and shall give bond, with good and sufficient security to be approved by the mayor of said city, in such amount as may be determined upon by the mayor and council, for the faithful performance of their duties, and to account for all moneys that may come into their hands as such officers of said city. Said officers shall perform such duties as required and provided for in this Act, and as may be prescribed and required of them by the laws and ordinances of said city, and by the mayor and council. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 23) 
Sec. 24. - City attorney. 
Be it further enacted, that the Mayor and Council of said City shall have the power and authority to employ an attorney to represent said city in any litigation to which said city may be a party, or in any matter in which said city or the municipal authorities thereof may need legal counsel. Their said city attorney shall be paid for his services such fees as may be reasonable and just, and as may be agreed upon between himself and the mayor and council. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 24) 
Sec. 25. - City sexton. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council shall have authority to employ a city sexton to have the superintendence of and the care of the city cemeteries; his duties shall be such as shall be prescribed by the mayor and council and by the laws and ordinances of said city. He shall receive such compensation as may be prescribed for by the ordinances of said city or by the mayor and council. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 25) 
Sec. 26. - City physician. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council shall have authority to elect a city physician, whose duties shall be such as required by the ordinances of said city and by the direction of the mayor and council, and his compensation shall be fixed by the laws and ordinances of said city or by the mayor and council. He shall co-operate with the board of health hereinafter provided for, and shall consult and advise with the board of health in their efforts to maintain the cleanliness of said city and preserve the health of the inhabitants thereof. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 26) 
Sec. 27. - Suspension or removal of officers. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland shall have the right at any time, without a trial, to suspend or remove any of the subordinate officers of said city, including the clerk, treasurer, tax-receiver, tax-collector, marshal, policemen, city attorney, city physician, and sexton, for any breach of duty or failure to perform duty, insubordination, incapacity, or for conduct unbecoming for an officer or gentleman, or for other good and sufficient cause or reason, to be adjudged by the mayor and council. The mayor may, at any time during a recess of council, suspend any of said officers for any of the above-named reasons, for a period not to exceed ten days without pay, and appoint a substitute therefor. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 27) 
Sec. 28. - Additional police. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall be empowered to employ such additional police or detective force as a good government of said city may require. The compensation and duties of said force shall be fixed and determined by said mayor and council. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 28) 
Sec. 29. - Mayor's court. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor, and, in his absence, the mayor pro tem, and, in the absence of both, any one or more members of the council, may hold mayor's court for the purpose of trying offenders against the laws and ordinances of said city, and may exercise all the powers conferred by this charter upon the mayor, and may punish, for a violation of a law or ordinance of said city, by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, imprisonment in the city jail, or the county jail by permission of the county authorities, not exceeding fifty days, work on the streets or other public works under the supervision of the marshals of said city, not exceeding fifty days, one or more, or all of these, at the discretion of the trial court. While sitting as a court for the trial of offenders the said court shall have the power to punish for contempt by fine not exceeding fifty dollars, imprisonment or work in the manner already described in this section, not exceeding fifty days, one or more or all of these at the discretion of the trial court. There may be an appeal in any case from the mayor's court to council; the judgment therein may be reviewed by certiorari to the superior court of Camden County. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 29) 
Editor's note— The former mayor's court is now known as the municipal court. (O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1) 
Sec. 30. - Mayor ex-officio justice of the peace. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor of said city shall be ex-officio a justice of the peace, as far as to authorize him to administer oaths, attest deeds, mortgages, or any other instrument or paper which a justice of the peace is authorized to attest, to issue warrants for any offense committed within the corporate limits of said city against any law or ordinance of said city or of this State; and when the offense is against laws of the State, the mayor may hear evidence and commit to jail or take bond for appearance before the State court having jurisdiction of the offense, the same as a justice of the peace could do; if the offense charged in the warrant be one against the laws or ordinances of the city, the arresting officer shall carry the accused before the mayor's court for trial, and none other, and the same shall be disposed of as other cases of arrest not made under warrant. All warrants issued by the mayor, or those acting in his stead, shall be directed "To the Marshal of Kingsland, and to all and singular sheriffs deputy sheriffs, and constables of this State," and any one of said officers shall have the same authority to execute said warrants as the sheriffs have to execute criminal warrants. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 30) 
Editor's note— The office of justice of the peace has been replaced by the office of magistrate. See O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 31. - Witnesses. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor, or those holding mayor's court in his stead, shall have power and authority to subpoena witnesses to attend the mayor's court under the same rules and regulations that govern the superior courts of this State, and to compel their attendance, and to punish any witnesses who have been subpoenaed and failed to attend, under the provisions for contempts already provided for in this charter. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 31) 
Sec. 32. - Pleadings. 
Be it further enacted, that all trials in the police court of said city shall be had without written pleadings of any kind, unless the defendant shall, upon the calling of the case, file a written demand with the city clerk that an accusation in writing shall be preferred against him, in which event a written accusation, in form substantially as follows: "Georgia, Camden County, City of Kingsland _______ In the Mayor's Court of the City of Kingsland: I, ___________ marshal (or policeman) of said City, in the name and behalf of the City of Kingsland, charge and accuse ___________ of the offense of _______, contrary to the laws and ordinances of said city, the good, order, peace, and dignity thereof," shall be preferred against the defendant, signed by the officer making or prosecuting the case, and filed in said court; whereupon the defendant shall enter his pleas thereon in writing; and the issue being thus formed, the case shall proceed to trial and disposition. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 32) 
Editor's note— The former mayor's court or police court is now known as the municipal court. (O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1) 
Sec. 33. - Subpoenas. 
Be it further enacted, that the said mayor while acting as judge of the police court shall have authority to subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance, whether residents of said city or not; to issue subpoenas duces tecum, for witnesses and the production of books and papers, whether in the city or not, and compel their production; to compel the presence of witnesses by imprisonment if necessary, and to take bonds to secure their attendance, and to forfeit said bonds before said mayor's or police court; to punish as for contempt, failure to obey its legal summonses or subpoenas; to grant continuances under rules of law; to take bonds and recognizances for persons charged with offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city, for their appearance at its sessions from time to time, until the principal in said bond is tried for the offense charged, in such amount as may be deemed sufficient to compel their appearance; to forfeit all appearance bonds when the principal shall fail or refuse to appear at said court at the time and place specified therein; and shall have the authority to do generally all other acts and things necessary for the proper enforcement of its authority. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 33) 
Sec. 34. - Appearance bonds. 
Be it further enacted, that the marshal or any policeman of said city shall release any person arrested for a violation of the laws and ordinances of said city, upon said person giving a bond with good and sufficient security to be approved by the marshal or other arresting officer, or city clerk of said city, payable to the mayor of said City of Kingsland, in an amount fixed by the said marshal or other arresting officer and the city clerk of said city, for the personal appearance of such persons before the police court of said city at the time and place therein specified, to answer the charges against him, and from time to time until the principal in such bond is tried and the case disposed of, and not to depart from thence, except by leave of the court. And in the event such principal fails to appear before said court as stipulated in said bond, said bond shall be forfeited in said court, and the presiding officer thereof shall have the power and authority to order the principal in said bond rearrested and placed in the city jail or calaboose until such case shall be tried and disposed of, or to admit the defendant to bail, as he may deem proper. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 34) 
Sec. 35. - Warrant for arrest. 
Be it further enacted, that in no case, except as hereinafter provided, shall the marshal or any policeman of said city make any arrest of any person charged with the violation of any of the laws and ordinances of said city, without first having procured from the mayor, or mayor pro tem., of said city (each of them being hereby authorized and empowered to issue warrants for the apprehension and arrests of persons charged with violating any of the laws and ordinances of said city) a warrant for the arrest of such persons, unless the offense or violation is committed in the presence of such arresting officer, or the offender is likely to escape, in which event he may arrest and detain such persons until a proper warrant can be secured, authorizing the offenders further detention, the marshal and policeman of said city, and the detective force, being fully authorized and empowered to arrest any person within the corporate limits of the City of Kingsland, charged with an offense against its laws and ordinances, and to imprison and confine such persons arrested by them in the city jail or calaboose, or in the jail of Camden County, until the trial, or admit them to bail as provided. The marshal and policemen of said city are authorized, to the same extent as sheriffs of this State, to execute warrants places in their hands charging any person with a violation of any of the criminal laws of this State. The marshal and policemen are also authorized to arrest anywhere within the limits of this State any person charged with a violation of the laws and ordinances of said city, upon a warrant from the proper officer of said city authorized to issue the same. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 35) 
Sec. 36. - Power to require bystander to aid in arrest. 
Be it further enacted, that the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland shall have the power and authority to authorize, by ordinance, the marshal or any policeman of said city to summons any and all bystanders to aid in the arrest of any person or persons violating any ordinances of said city or any law of this State, and to provide a punishment for any person or persons failing or refusing to obey such summons. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 36) 
Sec. 37. - Nuisances. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council may, by ordinance, declare what shall be nuisances in said city, and by ordinance provide for the abatement of the same. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 37) 
Sec. 38. - Animals generally. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the power and authority to prevent horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, dogs, and all other animals from running at large in said city; to prevent and prohibit the keeping of hogs within the city limits, or to regulate the manner in which they must be kept, if allowed kept; to limit the number of hogs to be kept by persons in said city, if allowed kept therein; and shall have full power and authority to take up and impound any of such animals and punish all owners of any such animals who shall fail or refuse to obey such ordinances as may be adopted by the mayor and council of said city to carry out and effectuate this authority. The mayor and council shall also have the authority to levy and collect such tax as they may deem proper upon dogs kept within the limits of said city, to provide for the registration thereof, and to prescribe such ordinances respecting the keeping of dogs as may be deemed proper, and to prescribe the punishment for violation of said ordinances. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 38) 
Sec. 39. - Animal pound. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council shall have authority to establish a pound for the impounding of any of the above-mentioned animals, and to change the same whenever they see proper; to fix a schedule of charges and penalties to be paid by the owners of such impounded animals before they are released from said pound; to regulate the mode or manner of sale or disposition of impounded animals where owner appears or when payment of the impounding fees charged, penalties, or cost is refused; to provide for the disposition of the proceeds of the sale of impounded animals; and to provide for the punishment of all persons who, without authority, shall break or enter the pound. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 39) 
Sec. 40. - Street work; commutation tax. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the power and authority to require every male inhabitant in said city, who by the laws of this State is subject to work on the public roads, to work such length of time on the streets of said city as the mayor and council may by ordinance direct, in no case to exceed fifteen days in any one year. Said persons so subject to street work shall have the right to relieve themselves of said work by paying a commutation tax which said mayor and council shall fix by ordinance, and which tax shall in no event exceed five (5) dollars per annum; said street work to be done, and commutation tax paid, at such times as the mayor and council may by ordinance direct. Any persons subject to work or pay said tax and failing to do so, alter being properly notified as provided under the laws and ordinances of said city, shall be punished in the police court of said city as the mayor and council may by ordinance prescribe. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 40) 
Sec. 41. - Board of health. 
Be it further enacted, that the said mayor and council shall have the authority to establish and put in operation a board of health for said city. The duties, powers, and compensations of said board, and the number of members that shall comprise the same, shall be such as are fixed and prescribed by the ordinances and laws of said city. Said mayor and council shall have authority to enact all ordinances and regulations prescribing penalties for the violation of such laws and ordinances that may be necessary for the purpose of maintaining such board of health. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 41) 
Sec. 42. - Health regulations. 
Be it further enacted, that the said mayor and council shall have the power and authority to enact and enforce ordinances to prevent the spread of any infectious or contagious diseases; to compel the vaccination of all persons within the limits of said city, whether residents or sojourners; also, to isolate any person or persons in said city afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease by confining such person or persons within the limits of, the premises provided by the mayor and council, either within or without the corporate limits of the city for such purposes; to isolate any person or persons who have been exposed to any infectious or contagious disease during the usual period of incubation of such disease, by confining such person or persons during such period, within the premises provided for by the mayor and council, either within or without the corporate limits of said city. The mayor and council shall also have the power and authority to establish, declare, and maintain quarantine regulations against all contagious or infectious diseases, and to punish violators of any quarantine regulations of the city. They shall have power to build, establish, and maintain pest-houses, either within or without the corporate limits of the city, and for this purpose they are authorized to buy, hold, or receive real estate either within or without the city limits. They shall have the power to provide vaccination points, and to employ physicians at the expense of the city to vaccinate all persons who are unable to procure vaccination, and may provide by ordinance punishment for persons failing or refusing to be vaccinated, and to prescribe punishment for all persons violating any ordinances, rules, and regulations enacted by said mayor and council for the prevention of diseases and for the promotion of the health of said city. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 42) 
Sec. 43. - Fire and building regulations. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council may enact any and all ordinances, rules, and regulations necessary to lay out and prescribe a fire district in said city, and enlarge, change, or modify its limits from time to time; to prescribe when, how, and of what material buildings in said limits may be erected, repaired, or covered; how thick the walls must be, how the chimneys, stove-pipes and flues are to be constructed; to provide for fire-escapes in said buildings; and generally to do all such things and to pass such laws and ordinances as the mayor and council may deem necessary in order to protect said city as far as possible from dangers from fire, and to prevent the spread of fire from one building to another, and for the protection and safety of the people. They shall also have the authority to order any changes in the construction or arrangement of buildings, chimneys, stove-pipes or flues, and to order the removal thereof when in their judgment the same are dangerous or likely to become so, and to make the owner of the premises pay the expenses of such change or removal, which expense may be collected as taxes are collected; and if any person, firm, or corporation shall erect or maintain any building that is not in accordance with the laws and ordinance of said city, said mayor and council may order such buildings removed or altered; and if such person, firm, or corporation shall not move or alter such buildings after notice to do so is given as may be pres-scribed, then said mayor and council shall have authority to remove or alter the same at the expense of the owners, which expense may be collected as taxes are collected. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 43) 
Sec. 44. - Streets, sidewalks, parks; eminent domain. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the absolute, full, and complete control and supervision of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, parks, and squares of said city, and shall have full power and authority to open lay out, widen, straighten, grade, or otherwise change the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, parks, and squares of said city, and shall have the power to lay off, grade, vacate, close up, open, curb, and pave the roads, streets, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, cross-drains, cross-walks, drains, and gutters, or any of them, for public use, or the use of laying wires or lines, or sewer pipes, throughout the streets, squares, lanes, alleys, and parks of said city, upon such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may by ordinance provide; and the mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to condemn property for the purpose of laying out and opening new streets, sidewalks, alleys, squares and parks in said city, and for the purpose of widening, straightening, grading, or in any way changing the streets, lanes, and sidewalks of said city. Whenever the said mayor and council shall desire to exercise the power and authority to condemn property as granted and conferred herein, said power and authority shall be exercised, whether the land sought to be condemned is in the hands of the owner or a trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, or agent, under the same terms and conditions as provided for in the general laws of this State with reference to the condemnation of private property for public use, as contained in Article 1, Chapter 9, of the Code of Georgia of 1910, beginning with section 5206 and embracing all sections following the same having reference to the condemnation of private property for public use, and as provided by acts amendatory thereof. The mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to remove or cause to be removed any building, steps, fences, gates, posts, or other obstruction, or nuisances of any kind in the public streets, alleys, lanes, sidewalks, parks, or squares of said city, and to enforce the provisions of the section by enactment of appropriate ordinances. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 44) 
Editor's note— The current law on eminent domain is found in O.C.G.A. title 22. 
Sec. 45. - Maintenance and improvement of public property. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to pass all laws and ordinances necessary for the draining and proper maintenance and care of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public places of said city; to provide for the paving, grading, macadamizing, curbing, or otherwise improving, for travel or drainage, the same or any part thereof; or to regrade, repave, recurb, remacadamize, or repair, in any way, the pavement, curbing, grade, or drainage of the same, whenever in the judgment of the said mayor and council the same becomes necessary or advisable; and the said mayor and council shall have the right and authority to provide, by ordinance how said paving, grading, macadamizing, or repairing, maintenance, and care of the same shall be paid, whether by the city or whether by the adjacent-land owners, or by both. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 45) 
Sec. 46. - Speed of trains and vehicles; riding on sidewalks. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority, by ordinance, to regulate and prescribe the speed of railroad-trains running within the limits of said city; they shall also have the full power and authority to regulate the speed of automobiles, motorcycles, or other vehicles driven by either steam or gasoline, on the streets of said city; they shall also have full power and authority to prohibit by ordinance the riding of bicycles, motorcycles, or other vehicles or any other kind whatever, upon the sidewalks of said city. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 46) 
Editor's note— The speed of railroad trains is regulated by the Federal Railroad Safety Act. 
Sec. 47. - Public utilities. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland shall have the power and authority to build, establish, maintain, equip, repair, extend, or enlarge a system of waterworks, sewerage, natural or manufactured gas system, electric lights (any one or all of them) in the City of Kingsland, for the purpose of supplying its inhabitants and the city and consumers generally with water, sewerage, natural or manufactured gas system, and electric lights, or any of them, and the said mayor and council shall have the power to do any and all things necessary for such purposes; to contract with any person or persons, firms, or corporations, for the purchase of land or premises to be used in connection therewith, whether within or without the city, and to contract for the purchase of easements over lands and premises to be used in connection therewith, whether the lands and premises over which easements are desired are within or without the limits of said city, and, if necessary for any or all of such purposes, to condemn the same as herein provided for. Said mayor and council, in the name of the city, shall have full power and authority to make purchase of plants, machinery, and any and all articles and things that may be necessary or advisable for the proper equipment of said plants or either of them, and for the purpose of properly repairing and maintaining the same, or for the purpose of extending, enlarging, or in any way improving said plants, or either of them; to build and erect houses, bore wells, build shapes [sic] and to furnish the same with machinery, tools, and equipment that may be necessary or expedient in the care and maintenance of said plants; and to generally have the power and authority to do any and all things necessary or expedient to the upkeep, care, maintenance, and improvement of said plants or in the extension or enlargement thereof. Said mayor and council, in the name of the city, shall have the right and authority to make contracts with the inhabitants of said city, and to consumers generally, whether residents of said city or residents without the limits thereof, for the furnishing of water, electric lights, electric power, sewerage, natural or manufactured gas system, or any of them, at such rates and under such rules and regulations as the mayor and council may provide. Said mayor and council in the name of said city, shall have the right, power, and authority to contract with any person, firm, or corporation whatever, for the furnishing of electric lights to light the streets of such municipality, or for the furnishing of electric power to said city, upon such terms, conditions, stipulations, agreements, and limitations as the mayor and council may prescribe; and the said City of Kingsland shall have the power and authority to enforce such contracts in the courts of this State, in the same manner that other contracts are enforced under the laws of Georgia, said mayor and council shall also have the right and authority to contract with persons, firms, and corporations in other municipalities for the furnishing of electric lights and power under the same terms, rates, rules, and regulations as the same is furnished to residents of the City of Kingsland, or at a higher rate as the said mayor and council of the City of Kingsland may provide. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act the mayor and council of said city shall have the right and authority to purchase or condemn land and premises for such purposes, whether within or without the limits of said city, the condemnation proceedings to be the same as hereinbefore set out in this charter. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 47; 1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 558), page 2097, § 1) 
Sec. 48. - Franchises. 
Be it further enacted, that the said mayor and council shall also have full power and authority to grant franchises over its streets and other public property to any persons, firms, or corporations for the furnishing of water, electric lights, electric power, sewerage, natural or manufactured gas system, or any of them, to the city and its inhabitants, and to make such contracts, with such persons, firms, or corporations for water, electric lights, electric power, sewerage, natural or manufactured gas system, or any of them as the mayor and council, may deem proper; provided further, that no such franchise shall be granted for a period longer than thirty years from the date of granting same. The mayor and council of the City of Kingsland are hereby authorized and empowered to enact all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations necessary to carry out and effectuate this section; provided, however, that any franchise heretofore granted to any person, firm or corporation by the City of Kingsland shall be continued for the full period of time as heretofore granted by said town. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 48; 1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 558), page 2097, § 2) 
Sec. 49. - Bond issues. 
Be it further enacted, that the City of Kingsland may issue its bonds for the payments of its debts or for public improvements, but such bonds shall be issued only in accordance with and under the provisions of the laws of Georgia, as found in sections 440 etc. of the Political Code of Georgia. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 49) 
Editor's note— The current law on municipal bonds is found in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq. 
Sec. 50. - Sinking fund. 
Be it further enacted, that it shall be the duty of the mayor and council of said city to set aside annually a sufficient sum as a sinking-fund to retire the bonded debt of said city, and to pay the interest thereon as said interest becomes due. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 50) 
Sec. 51. - Bond election. 
Be it further enacted, that whenever the City of Kingsland, acting through its mayor and council, shall desire to create a bonded debt for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the powers and provisions of this charter, it shall have the right and authority to do so when authorized by two thirds of the qualified voters of said city at an election held for that purpose as provided by law. The mayor and council shall have the authority to enact such ordinances to carry out and effectuate the provisions of this section. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 51) 
Sec. 52. - Licenses. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the full power and authority to tax and grant licenses to persons keeping markets in said city, and to provide for the inspection of all meats, fruits, and vegetables sold or offered for sale in said city, as well as for the inspection and regulation of all butcher-pens used by butchers in said city, whether said pens are located within the limits of said city or not, and all animals slaughtered or intended for slaughter by the owners of markets or persons conducting same, and all animals brought in said city for sale to markets or brought into the city after being sold, for the purpose of being butchered and dispensed to the people of said city. The said mayor and council of said city shall also have the right and authority to tax, license, regulate, and control by ordinance all taverns, hotels, boarding-houses, cafes, restaurants soda-water founts, places for the sale of creams, ices, soda-water, and soft drinks of any character, or dealers in the same; livery-stables, sales-stables or lots, and owners or keepers of same; hacks, drays, jitneys, or other vehicles and operators of same; auctioneers, vendue-masters, itinerant tracers [sic], picture-shows, theaters, shows and exhibitions and fairs of all kinds, theatrical performances; dummy or street-railways, oil-mills, ice-works or factories, ginneries, grist-mills, flour mills, planning-mills [sic], sawmills, and all other kinds of mills; machine-shops wood-shops, black smith-shops, garages, and shops of any other kind; circuses, and owners or managers of same; lightning-rod-dealers, itinerant or otherwise, bill-posters, book-agents, peddlers of stoves, machines, or any article of merchandise; itinerant traders, emigrant agents, itinerant vendor of any and all kinds of goods, wares; merchandise, or other things, salesman offering for sale stock in oil companies or any corporation; pool-rooms, billiard-rooms, pool-tables, billiard-tables, and any and all kinds of tables for public play, bolling-alley, and every keeper of any thereof, and every keeper of any table, devices, stand, or place for the performance of any game or play, whether played with sticks, balls, rings, or other things and contrivances; upon flying jennies, merry-go-rounds, and other like contrivances, skating finks, dance-halls, or the owner or operator or keeper of any of them; dealers in bicycles, velocipedes, and other like vehicles; dealers in automobiles; insurance companies of any character, and agents representing any such companies, debenture companies, bond companies, and agents thereof; loan companies, and agents thereof, and loan agents for any and all kinds of business; oil companies and agents thereof; brokers and commission merchants of all kinds; dealers in petroleum oils of any character; dealers in lubricating oils, paints, or like articles; undertaking establishment, undertakers, newspapers, publishing companies, job-printing establishments; dealers in coffins and caskets, and undertaking supplies; dealers in futures; guano factories and dealers in guano or fertilizers of any kind; keepers of slaughter-pens; dealers in fresh fish and oysters; dealers in vegetables, fruits, breads, or other articles of food; dealers in coal, wood, ice, or any or all of them; owners or keepers of bakeries, plumbers; banks or bankers; telephone companies, telegraph companies, express companies, real-estate companies, or brokers; dealers in plumbers supplies, dealers in builders supplies; marble-yards, brick-yards, barber-shops, junk-shops, cotton warehouses, and any and all other kinds of warehouses, bottling-works, or the owners of any of such places; dealers in goods, wares, or merchandise of any character on the installment plan; dealers in lime, brick, cement, lumber, shingles, junk, or any of such articles, and all and every other business, agency, calling, vocation, trade, or dealer, not heretofore mentioned, and which under the constitution and laws of Georgia are subject to license and specific [sic]. The mayor and council shall have the right to fix and prescribe the amount of said taxes and license; to provide where the same shall be paid; to provide for the revocation of any or all licenses issued under this section; to provide for the enforcement and effectuating the provisions of this section, and to provide penalties for the violation of the provisions thereof. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 52) 
Editor's note— Specific business, and occupation taxes are regulated in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq. 
Sec. 53. - Registration of business, etc. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council shall have full power and authority to require any person, firm, or corporation, whether a resident or nonresident of the City of Kingsland, engaged in or carrying on or who may engage in or carry on any trade, business, vocation, or profession within the corporate limits of said city, either by themselves or by their agent or agents, to register their names and business, calling, vocation, or profession annually, and to require such person or firm or corporation to pay for such registration, and for license to prosecute, carry on, or engage in such business, calling, or profession such amount as the mayor and council may by ordinance require. Said mayor and council may by ordinance provide for the punishment of all persons, firms, or corporations who are required by ordinances to pay the said special tax and register, who shall engage in or offer or attempt to engage in such business, calling, or profession without first complying in all respects with the city ordinances in reference thereto. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 53) 
Sec. 54. - Tax rate; enforcement of collection. 
The mayor and council of the City of Kingsland shall have power and authority to levy and collect a tax annually not to exceed one dollar and fifty ($1.50) cents on the one hundred ($100.00) dollars upon all and every species of property, both real and personal, within the limits of the City of Kingsland, including bonds, notes, debts, choses in action, money employed in banking and otherwise, and to enforce the collection of same by execution, levy and sale, as provided for by and under the laws of the State of Georgia, and as provided for by ordinance duly adopted by the mayor and council of said City. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 54; 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 57), page 2189, § 1) 
Sec. 55. - Tax assessors. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council shall, at their first meeting in March of each year, elect three intelligent, discreet and upright persons, citizens and qualified voters of said city, and owners of real estate therein, as city tax-assessors, whose terms of office shall be one year. Said city tax-assessor shall at any time be removed from office by the mayor and council, for good and sufficient cause to be judged by said mayor and council, and all vacancies occurring from any cause may be filled by the mayor and council at any time. It shall be the duty of said tax-assessors to assess the value of real estate in said city for the purpose of taxation by said city; and it shall be their duty to examine the tax-returns placed before them by the officers receiving the same, and increase the valuation of the personal property thereof when in their judgment the value placed thereon is too small. The mayor and council shall have the authority to prescribe rules for the government of said city tax-assessors. Said assessors shall make returns of the assessments made by them to the mayor and council each year at such time as the mayor and council may by ordinance direct. If any taxpayer is dissatisfied with the assessment made of his property either real or personal by said assessors, such taxpayer shall within ten days after the assessors have made their returns to the mayor and council, file written notice with the clerk of council of his dissatisfaction, and shall name in his said notice one arbitrator to represent him in fixing the value of his said property. Upon such notice being filed with the said clerk, it shall be the duty of the mayor to forthwith name an arbitrator to represent said city in fixing the value of the property in dispute, and the two arbitrators so elected shall be immediately notified by the city clerk and shall forthwith select an umpire, and the board of Arbitrators so constituted shall immediately proceed to give their awards as to the value of such property, which award shall be returned to the city clerk, and shall be final on both the city and taxpayer. The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to pass such ordinances as are required to effectuate this section. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 55) 
Editor's note— The value of property is determined as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-352 et seq. 
Sec. 56. - Tax collection generally. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have power and authority to provide by ordinance when the taxes of said city shall fall due in what length of time said taxes shall be paid, when tax executions shall issue against defaulters, and to fix a penalty for the non-payment of taxes when due. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 56) 
Sec. 57. - Power to prohibit idling, loitering, etc. 
Be it further enacted that the mayor and council of said city shall have the right and authority, by ordinance, to prohibit idling, loitering, and loafing on the streets, alleys, lanes, squares, and sidewalks of said city, or upon any of them, and to prohibit the idling, loitering, and loafing in any of the public buildings in said city, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 57) 
Sec. 58. - Weights and measures. 
Be it further enacted, That the mayor and council of said city be and are hereby empowered and authorized to regulate by ordinances the selling, weighing, measuring of hay, wood, ice, coal, coke, and all other articles and commodities sold by weight or measure; to require dealers to keep honest weights and measures, to give full and honest weight and measures; to provide for the inspection and regulation of such weights and measures; to provide that the marshal and policeman of said city shall have the power and authority to stop wagons or drays loaded with any of such articles and commodities and have the same measured or weighed; and see if the articles or commodities thereon are of full weight or measure; and to prescribe penalties for any violation of this section or ordinance adopted effectuating the same. The provisions of this section shall also apply to persons who reside without the limits of the city, bringing any of said articles or commodities in said city for sale. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 58) 
Sec. 59. - Water and sewerage connections; filling wells. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to compel any resident or nonresident or property owner, owning lands located within the legal limits of the city and adjacent to any of the streets of said city over which the city water or sewerage system or city water and sewerage systems may be located or hereafter extended, upon which lands houses are erected, or may be erected, and occupied either by the owner or by the tenants, to connect the same with the water or sewerage system or water and sewerage systems now laid out or hereafter laid out by said city, and to compel said property owners, or other owners controlling or using such building, to pay the expense of said connections when done by the city, which authority is hereby granted in the event such owner or other person fails or refuses to cause such connections to be made within such reasonable time as the mayor and council may direct, to use such water or sewerage facilities paying the rate duly established by ordinance for same; the city is hereby granted the right and authority to effect collections of moneys due for both installation and use in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations that the collection of taxes are enforced. The mayor and council of said city shall have the authority to require all surface-wells, dry-wells, or other places to be filled in at the expense of the owner; and should the owner fail or refuse to fill the same within a reasonable time as the mayor and council may direct, the same shall be done by the city, and the expense thereof shall be collected from the owner in the same manner and under the same authority as taxes are collected. The mayor and council are hereby authorized and empowered to enact such ordinances as may be necessary to fully effectuate the provisions of this section. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 59; 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 57), page 2189, § 2) 
Sec. 60. - Building regulations; permits. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to regulate the building or the repairing of any buildings within the corporate limits of said city or the removal thereof; to require persons desiring to build, repair, or remove buildings in said city to first obtain a permit from the mayor and council or from such officer as may be authorized to grant the same, before erecting, repairing, or removing same; to refuse to allow buildings to be erected, repaired, or removed in said city when satisfied that said buildings or addition thereto, or repairing thereof, or the removal of same will be manifestly against the best interests of the city, or will endanger the safety or health of the citizens, or likely to become a nuisance and offensive to the property-owners or residents of said city; to require applications for permits to be made and to prescribe how they shall be made, what they shall contain, and with whom filed; to provide for the removal, at the expense of the owners or builders of any houses erected, repaired, or removed in violation of such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by said mayor and council for the building, repairing, or removing houses in said city; and the mayor and council of said city are hereby authorized and empowered to enact all ordinances to carry out and effectuate the provisions of this section, and to provide a penalty for the violation of such ordinances. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 60) 
Sec. 61. - Parks. 
Be it further enacted, that the said mayor and council shall have the full power and authority, by ordinance, to establish and maintain public parks in the streets of said city and at other places therein, as they may deem proper. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 61) 
Sec. 62. - Prisoners. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council shall have full power and authority to provide for the working of the convicts from the police court upon the streets and other public places and works of said city, to establish, equip, and maintain a city chain-gang, and prescribe rules and regulations for the proper management of same; to maintain, establish, and equip a city, jail or calaboose in said city for the safe-keeping of prisoners, convicts, and persons charged with violating the laws and ordinances of said city, and to provide for the feeding of such prisoners. The mayor and council shall have the authority to enact such ordinances necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 62) 
Sec. 63. - Fire department. 
Be it further enacted, that said mayor and council shall have the power and authority by ordinance to create and establish a fire department in said city, to provide for the pay and equipment thereof, to purchase any necessary apparatus, and make any needful rules and regulations for its proper maintenance. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 63) 
Sec. 64. - Borrowing. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the power and authority to borrow money for the use of said city by making a temporary loan to supply casual deficiency of revenue, not to exceed one fifth (1-5) of one (1) per cent of the assessed value of the taxable property therein in any one year; and it is further enacted that the sum or sums so borrowed shall be paid out of the income of the city for the fiscal year in which the loan or loans are made, and before the expiration of the fiscal year in which the same was or were made. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 64) 
Sec. 65. - City Code. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city may codify all ordinances, resolutions and by-laws of said city, together with the charter of said city, into one book, to be known as the Code of the City of Kingsland; and when the same is adopted by said mayor and council, said code shall be admitted in evidence in any of the courts of this State, upon the certificate of the city clerk certifying the same to be the code of laws and ordinances of said city. The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to revise said code or recodify the laws and ordinances of said city whenever they may deem it necessary. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 65) 
Editor's note— The current law on codification of ordinances is found in O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 66. - Bank as depository. 
Be it further enacted that the mayor and council of said city may select some bank as a city depository and may require the treasurer of said city to deposit all funds of the city therein. Said depository may be selected upon such rules, regulations, conditions, and requirements as the mayor and council may by ordinance prescribe. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 66) 
Sec. 67. - Regulation [of] transportation for hire. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the full right and power, by ordinance, to regulate all vehicles of every kind and description used in the city for hire or profit in the transportation of passengers, fright, drayage, either or all of them; to provide for the inspection of same, and to fix the rates of fare and carriages thereon, and to fix and prescribe penalties for violation thereof. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 67) 
Sec. 68. - Explosives or combustibles. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the right, power, and authority by ordinance, to regulate the keeping of gunpowder, dynamite, petroleum oils, turpentine, and any and all other kinds of explosives or combustible materials; to regulate the sale and use of firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, and any other kind of fireworks; or to prohibit the use or firing of them, or either of them, within the limits of said city, and to prescribe penalties for violations of such ordinances. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 68) 
Sec. 69. - Cemeteries. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all cemeteries belonging to said city. They shall also have the right and authority to regulate the establishment of any cemetery in said city or extending or enlarging the boundaries of any cemetery now located in said city; and no new cemetery shall be established or located within the limits of said city except by approval and consent of the mayor and council thereof, and the boundaries and limits of any cemetery now located in said city shall not be extended or enlarged except by the consent and approval of said mayor and council. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 69) 
Sec. 70. - Matching for drinks, raffling, games for hazarding money, etc. 
Be it further enacted, that the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland shall have the power and authority, by ordinance, to prohibit, within the limits of said city, the hazarding of money or other things of value at what is commonly known as "matching" to match for drinks, any and all other games (other than innocent games) for the hazarding of money or other things of value; to prohibit the owners, lessees, or occupants of buildings in said city from allowing or permitting persons to match for drinks, money, or other things of value therein, or to use other schemes for the hazarding of money or other things of value therein; to prohibit raffling in said city; and to prescribe penalties for the violation of any and all such ordinances. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 70) 
Sec. 71. - Arrests; right to break and enter houses. 
Be it further enacted, that the marshal and policemen of said city shall have the right and authority, upon proper warrants, to break and enter any house or place in said city where they or either of them may have reason to suspect that any of the laws and ordinances of the city are being violated, and to arrest the persons therein and imprison or admit them to bail as hereinbefore provided for in cases of arrest. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 71) 
Sec. 72. - Auditor. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the right, power, and authority to employ, at such times as they may deem necessary, an auditor to examine and audit the books of the city and each department thereof, and to pay a reasonable compensation therefor. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 72) 
Sec. 73. - Tax deeds; redemption. 
Be it further enacted, that whenever any real property is sold under any process of the City of Kingsland, the officer making the sale shall have the power and authority to convey the same by proper conveyance to the purchaser; but all such property that may be sold under execution for city taxes shall be subject to redemption within the period allowed by law of property sold under execution for State and County taxes. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 73) 
Sec. 74. - Additional city officers. 
Be it further enacted, that the mayor and council of said city shall have the right to elect such other municipal officers beside those herein specified as to them seem necessary and proper therefor when necessary, by ordinance, and in the same manner prescribing their duties and compensation and fixing their compensation. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 74) 
Sec. 75. - Salaries; increase, etc. 
Be it further enacted, that the salaries of all city officers, when fixed and determined by the mayor and council in the manner prescribed in this Act and in the manner prescribed by the laws and ordinances of said city, shall not be increased or diminished during the terms of office for which such officers are elected. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 75) 
Sec. 76. - General powers. 
Be it further enacted, that authority to carry out and effectuate by ordinance each and every power granted to the City of Kingsland in this Act is hereby expressly conferred on the mayor and council of said city; and said mayor and council shall have generally the power and authority to make and pass such rules, by-laws, and ordinances as shall appear to them necessary or requisite for preserving or promoting the peace, dignity, good order, and welfare of said City of Kingsland. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 76) 
Sec. 77. - Referendum as to adoption of Act. 
Be it further enacted, that this Act shall not become effective until it is ratified by a majority vote of the registered qualified voters of said City of Kingsland, voting at an election to be called by the mayor and council of said city at a date not less than thirty days nor more than sixty days from September 1st, 1927. The clerk of said city shall make out and certify a registration list to be used at said election, placing on said list the names of all parties whose names appear on the registration list last made out by the county registrars, and who have resided in said city six months prior to September 1st, 1927. Said list so certified shall be filed with the mayor and council of said city ten days prior to said election. If at said election a majority of the registered qualified voters of said city, voting in said election, shall vote to ratify this Act, it shall become effective upon the returns of said election being filed with the mayor and council of said city and the result of said election places [sic] upon the minutes of said city. Should a majority of the registered qualified voters of said city, voting at said election, vote against the ratification of this Act, then same shall be void and shall not become effective. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 77) 
Sec. 78. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
(1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 236), page 1241, § 78) 
Sec. 79. - Regular meetings of mayor and council. 
The mayor and council of the City of Kingsland are hereby granted the right and authority to determine and establish, by ordinance, a fixed regular monthly meeting day for the transaction of the business of said city, such meetings to be held at the duly established city hall in said city. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 630), page 2260, § 1) 
[Sec. 80.] - Zoning and planning generally. 
That pursuant to Ga. Const. art. 3, § 7, ¶ 26 [now Ga. Const. art. 9, § 2, ¶ 4], the City of Kingsland is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances and pass laws whereby the said City of Kingsland may be zoned and districted for various uses, and other or different uses prohibited therein, and regulating the use for which said zones or districts may be set apart, and regulating plans for the development and improvement of real estate therein, and to adopt all zoning and planning laws, not inconsistent with the Constitution, as said City may deem necessary or proper, to promote the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort or general welfare. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 156, § 1) 
[Sec. 81.] - Contents of zoning regulations. 
That the Mayor and Council of said City, for any one or more of the objects above named, may adopt by ordinances a plan or plans for the districting or zoning of said City for the purpose or regulating, defining and restricting; 
(a)  the location of trades, industries, apartment-houses, dwellings, or other uses of property, 
(b)  the height of buildings or other structures, 
(c)  the area of dimensions of lots or yards used in connection with buildings or other structures, 
(d)  the alignment of buildings or other structures near street frontages. 
The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of said purposes. 
The City may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as said Mayor and Council shall deem best suited to accomplish the intent of the zoning regulations. In the determination and establishment of districts and regulations, classifications may be based on the nature or character of the trade, industry, profession, or other activity conducted or to be conducted upon the premises, and within the said zone, the number of persons, families, or other group units to reside in or to use buildings, the public, quasi-public, or private nature of the use of premises, or upon any other basis or bases revelant to the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, order, propriety, or welfare. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 156, § 2) 
[Sec. 82.] - Residential districts. 
Said Mayor and Council shall be empowered in any districts proposed to be set aside primarily for residence purposes, to further classify the use thereof and to provide therein the class or classes of residents to be housed therein, and to provide therein such or similar regulations and restrictions as shall tend to secure the welfare, public health, morals, safety and good order of the City and the residents thereof. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 156, § 3) 
[Sec. 83.] - Severability. 
If any provision of this Act shall be held to be unconstitutional, such provision alone shall be invalid and the other parts of this Act shall be uneffected thereby, and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 156, § 4) 
[Sec. 84.] - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act shall be and the same are hereby repealed. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 156, § 5) 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This subpart B contains local constitutional amendments and state laws of local application that apply to the city but are not incorporated in the city charter. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision only the current language has been printed. A uniform system of capitalization, punctuation and citation to state statutes has been used. Any material in brackets has been added to clarify the meaning of the text. 

ARTICLE I. - KINGSLAND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1962 Ga. Laws, page 813. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. The section numbers and catchlines in this article have been supplied by the editor. 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-3 et seq.; city business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-3 et seq.; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Created; powers. 
A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in the City of Kingsland in Camden County to be known as the Kingsland Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the City of Kingsland and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "authority." 
B.  The authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. No member shall be mayor nor a member of the council of the City of Kingsland, but there shall be no other disqualification to hold public office by reason of membership in the authority. 
C.  The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of the City of Kingsland. 
The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the authority. The right of any private person to use or occupy any real estate of the authority for a period of one year or longer under any lease or other agreement for the purposes of taxation shall be classed as an interest in the real estate and as real property and shall be taxed as real property as now provided by law, or may be taxed as the General Assembly may hereafter provide by general or local law. The tax exemption herein provided also shall not include exemption from sale and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use of the authority. 
D.  The powers of the authority shall include but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To buy, acquire, develop, improve, own, operate, maintain, sell, lease as lessor and lessee, and mortgage land, buildings and property of all kinds within the City of Kingsland and also without the City of Kingsland, but not beyond the limits of Camden County; 
(2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
(3)  To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security, any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate any industrial plant or establishment within the City of Kingsland or at any place within Camden County sufficiently close to the City of Kingsland to be of benefit to the people of the city in the judgment of the authority. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the authority; 
(4)  To borrow money and to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(5)  To contract with the City of Kingsland and other political subdivisions and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(6)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(7)  To encourage and promote the expansion of industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation in the City of Kingsland and in Camden County, and to make long range plans therefor; 
(8)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland; 
(9)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(10)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(11)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
E.  The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the City of Kingsland, the State of Georgia, nor Camden County. 
F.  The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the authority when in performance of the work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the state. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. 
G.  The members of the authority shall receive only such compensation for their services to the authority as shall be authorized by the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland but such compensation shall be paid from funds of the authority. 
H.  The City of Kingsland, in its sole discretion, is authorized, upon due and lawful passage and adoption of an ordinance, to levy an annual tax, not to exceed one mill, on all taxable property within the city for the support of the authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by the City of Kingsland to the authority and when paid to the authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by it for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
I.  In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761) as amended, Ga. Code Ann. Supp. chapter 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize said authority to issue any bonds resulting in the creation of a lien against the tax digest of the City of Kingsland or any property located therein. 
J.  The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
K.  This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare of the City of Kingsland and its citizens, industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation within the City of Kingsland and in Camden County, and making of long range plans for such development and expansion and to authorize the use of public funds of the City of Kingsland for such purposes, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose. 
L.  This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within 30 days after such proclamation. 
M.  The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the City of Kingsland with power to extend its operations outside of the City of Kingsland but not beyond the limits of Camden County as herein provided, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within Camden County and the City of Kingsland. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of the City of Kingsland and Camden County. 
N.  There shall be no limitation upon the amount of debt which the authority may incur, but no debt created by the authority shall be a debt of the City of Kingsland, State of Georgia, nor Camden County. 
Sec. 2. - Continuation. 
That constitutional amendment which was proposed by Resolution Act No. 152 (House Resolution No. 415-859) of the 1962 General Assembly (Ga. L. 1962, p. 813) and which was duly ratified at the 1962 general election and which relates to creating the Kingsland development authority and providing for its powers, authority, funds, purposes, and procedures shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, p. 4365) 
ARTICLE II. - KINGSLAND AREA CONVENTION AND VISITORS' BUREAU AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4101. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. The section catchlines in this article have been supplied by the editor. The section numbers are those used in the original act. 

Sec. 1. - Title. 
This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Kingsland Area Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Membership; compensation of members. 
(a)  The Kingsland area convention and visitors bureau authority shall consist of five members who shall be at least 18 years of age and residents of the City of Kingsland or either an owner or employee of a business within the city. The mayor and each city councilperson shall appoint one member of the authority who shall serve for the time served by the councilperson or mayor who appointed them. Initially, all members shall serve for the remaining time of the councilperson or mayor so appointing. New appointments shall be made when there is a new mayor or city councilperson elected or at the beginning of a new term of a mayor or city councilperson. Appointment of the members of the authority shall be made within 30 days of the date the councilperson or mayor takes office or within 30 days of the first meeting of the mayor and city council in January. 
(b)  Any member can be removed by a majority vote of the mayor and entire council, with the mayor having the right to vote on the question of removal. 
(c)  All the members of the authority shall serve without compensation; provided, however, the city council may reimburse authority members for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with their service as authority members. 
Sec. 3. - Officers. 
The authority shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary-treasurer from its membership. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be reelected for succeeding terms. The chairman shall be entitled to vote on all issues. 
Sec. 4. - Executive director and other employees. 
The authority shall have the power to employ an executive director as may be necessary in the operation of the authority's activities, to whom in turn shall be delegated the authority and responsibility necessary to properly administer the business of the authority and its agencies created in this act or at a later date, within policies set by the authority and subject to its review. The executive director shall have full charge of the offices and also all of the employees, and the executive director shall have authority to recommend to the authority the hiring and termination of the employees. The authority shall have the authority to establish salaries and compensation for said executive director and all of the employees. 
Sec. 5. - Meetings; voting. 
(a)  The authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it. Meetings of the authority shall be open to the public in accordance with the laws of this state. Written minutes of all meetings shall be kept; and within ten days of every meeting, a copy of the minutes shall be furnished to the mayor and council. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  At least three regular members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, including election of officers. The majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions and elections. 
Sec. 6. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the authority shall be to: 
(1)  Promote tourism, trade, and conventions for the City of Kingsland; 
(2)  Study, investigate, and develop plans for improving tourism in the City of Kingsland and the area and doing such things as tend to bring visitors and conventions into the city; 
(3)  Advise and recommend plans to the city council and departments of the city for the development of tourism in the city; and 
(4)  Otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of tourism in the city. 
(b)  Nothing in this act shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other authorities, departments, boards, and like agencies of the city. 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
(a)  The authority shall have all powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this act, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To sue and be sued in contract and in tort and to complain and defend in all courts; 
(2)  To adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name real property or rights and easements therein and franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by gift, grant, lease, or otherwise; to insure the same against any and all risk as such insurance may, from time to time, be available; and to use such property, rent or lease the same to or from others, make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of any such property in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority and the purposes thereof. Title to any such property of the authority shall be held by the authority exclusively for the benefit of the public; 
(4)  To exercise any one or more of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred by this act either alone or jointly or in common with one or more other parties, whether public or private. In any such exercise of such powers, rights, and privileges jointly or in common with others with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of projects, the authority may own an undivided interest in such projects with any other parties, whether public or private. The authority may enter into agreements with respect to any project with the other parties participating therein, and any such agreement may contain such terms, conditions, and provisions consistent with this act as the parties thereto may deem to be in their best interest; 
(5)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the authority or to further the public purpose for which the authority is created; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute notes, other obligations, leases, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable in the judgment of the authority to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the authority's public purpose and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(8)  To enter into agreements with the federal government, state government, or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government, state government, or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the authority; 
(9)  Subject to proper appropriation to the authority, to receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by a political subdivision or taxing district of the state to pay the cost of any project or for any other purpose for which the authority may use its own funds pursuant to this act; 
(10)  To accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property, and facilities for expenditure and use by the authority for the accomplishment of its purpose; 
(11)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the authority, the election and duties of officers of the authority, and other matters which the authority determines to include in its bylaws; 
(12)  To invest any accumulation of its funds in any manner that public funds of the state or its political subdivisions may be invested; and 
(13)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this act and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the public purpose of the authority or the constitution and laws of this state. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in the other paragraphs of subsection (a) of this section and elsewhere in this act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the authority. 
Sec. 8. - Exemption from taxes. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the City of Kingsland, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties, to the extent of the authority's ownership therein, the authority, all income and obligations of the authority, and all transfers of such property shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of the state or any city, county, or other political subdivision thereof. The authority shall have all of the exemptions and exclusions from taxes which are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of properties or facilities similar to the properties and facilities to be owned and operated, or both, by the authority. 
Sec. 9. - Liability for obligations. 
Neither the members of the authority nor any person executing notes or obligations on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon by reason of said execution. 
Sec. 10. - Funding. 
The authority shall submit an annual budget request to the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland which, upon approval by the council, may in the discretion of the council be funded from the revenue received by the city from the hotel-motel tax, provided the authority complies with any provisions relative to the expenditure of said revenue contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-3 as now or hereafter in effect and any other criteria deemed proper by the mayor and council. 
Code reference— Excise tax on rooms and lodging, § 20-60. 
Sec. 11. - Examination of property and accounts. 
The mayor and council of the City of Kingsland shall be authorized, by and through a committee of their own number, or by any person they may select, to inspect at their pleasure, the state and condition of the authority and the property thereto belonging, and also all books and accounts pertaining to the affairs of the authority, and the authority shall give and furnish them any reasonable facility and assistance in making such inspections. 
Sec. 12. - Creation of obligations against city. 
The Kingsland area convention and visitors bureau shall not have the power or authority to bind the City of Kingsland by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness or otherwise. No contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness incurred by the authority shall ever be a claim or charge against the city. 
ARTICLE III. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Grant of exemption. 
(a)  Senior Citizen's Homestead Exemption. Each resident of the City of Kingsland who is 65 years of age or older and who otherwise meet the qualifications and criterion specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40 and O.C.G.A. 48-5-47(b) shall be entitled to a senior citizen's homestead ad valorem taxation exemption upon the terms and conditions as set forth in the afore-cited Section of the Official Code of Georgia. 
The exemption provided by this act shall not exceed $25,000.00. For purposes of this act, gross income verification and income minimums shall not be required. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  Disabled Veteran's Homestead Exemption. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48 any disabled veteran meeting the definition, qualifications, and criterion set forth therein shall be entitled to the homestead exemption from municipal ad valorem taxation upon the terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in such Section of the Official Code of Georgia. 
The exemption provided by this act shall not exceed $25,000.00. For purposes of this act, any disabled veteran who was discharged under honorable conditions and qualifying for the homestead exemption shall file with the governing authority of the City of Kingsland or its designee, a copy of his DD Form 214 (discharge papers from his military records), along with a letter from the Department of Veterans Affairs, or a physician licensed to practice medicine, stating the qualifying disability. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted shall remain subject to taxation. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 2. - Application. 
The governing authority of the City of Kingsland or its designee shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this act and shall require with the initial application, such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption. All new exemption applications must be submitted to the City of Kingsland on or before August 1 of the tax year that applicants are eligible in order to take effect for the current tax year. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 8-12-2002) 
Sec. 3. - Renewals. 
After any property owner has filed the proper application and has been granted the exemption provided in this act, the exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner claims the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption, to notify the governing authority of the City of Kingsland or its designee in the event the property becomes ineligible for such exemption. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 4. - Status relative to other homestead exemptions. 
The exemption granted by this act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from the City of Kingsland ad valorem taxes. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686) 
Sec. 5. - Date of commencement. 
The exemption granted by this act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1993. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686) 
Sec. 6. - Status relative to county and state taxes. 
The exemption granted by this act shall not apply to or affect any county taxes for county purposes, county school district taxes for educational purposes, or state taxes. 
(1992 Ga. Laws, page 5686) 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsland, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
City. The word "city" means the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
Code. The word "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsland, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours as prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Kingsland. 
Council; city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the mayor and city council of Kingsland, Georgia. 
County. The term "county," "the county" or "this county" means Camden County, Georgia. 
Court. The word "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the court shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governor. The word "governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Land development ordinance. The term "land development ordinance" means the ordinance compiled and published by the city establishing zoning districts and regulating the uses of land therein, specifying offstreet parking and loading requirements, adopting general zoning regulations, describing zoning rules and regulations in such districts, defining such districts, providing for rezoning and redistricting, establishing certain building and zoning regulations in each of such districts, regulating land uses and accessory uses, prescribing the percentage of land area which may be occupied under varying circumstances, providing for variances and nonconforming uses, establishing a planning commission, providing for the subdivision of land, adopting general subdivision regulations, defining certain terms therein used, providing a method of administration and practice and procedure, providing penalties for violation and providing remedies for enforcement thereof. The state edition of all standard codes as adopted by the city council on September 23, 1991, and the subdivision regulations as prepared by the city department of community planning and development are incorporated by reference. 
Legislative intent. In all interpretations of this Code or of ordinances or resolutions, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in mind at all times the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate any provision, and a transposition of words and phrases may be resorted to when a clause or sentence is without meaning as it stands. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Kingsland" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
Officer. The word "officer" includes those officials appointed by the city council on a parttime or temporary basis, including the city attorney and municipal court judge. 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read as "and," and the word "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively, unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Requirements. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed controlling. 
Residence. The word "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utilities and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-of-way which is improved and designated for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state," "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statutory references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. The word "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name by which a street is commonly known, or any public place and the approaches thereto within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of the Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant; occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Title of offices. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of the City of Kingsland, Georgia." 
Writing; written. The word "writing" or "written" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after the sections of this Code and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(16)  The city's land development ordinance as defined in section 1-2; 
nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq.; franchises, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; taxation and revenue, Ch. 20. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsland, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section, not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Kingsland, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not to exceed 180 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city's sign ordinances, subdivision regulations and zoning rules and regulations are contained in the land development ordinance, which is compiled and published by the city. An official copy is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference— The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(13); elections, Ch. 6; emergency management, Ch. 7; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 9-20 et seq.; franchises, Ch. 10; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; municipal court, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 16; taxation and revenue, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Organization of city government. 
The administrative and functional organization of the city is as indicated on the following chart: 
CITY OF KINGSLAND 
Sec. 2-2. - Records and information management schedule for local government common records. 
The city hereby adopts for its use the Records and Information Management Schedule for Local Government Common Records as published by the Office of the State of Georgia Secretary of State, dated May 2003 and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, 4-12-2004) 
Secs. 2-3—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 6. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings. 
The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at city hall. The meeting on the second Monday and the fourth Monday shall begin at 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1968, § 1-201; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 5-14-2001) 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Special meetings. 
The mayor shall call special meetings of the council whenever in his opinion the public business may require it. Special meetings may also be called at the express request of any member of the council. 
(Code 1968, § 1-202) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-28. - Agenda. 
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council shall be delivered to the city clerk on the Wednesday preceding the next Monday meeting, whereupon the city clerk shall immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the council, the mayor and the city attorney with a copy of the list prior to the council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. None of such matters shall be otherwise presented to the council by administrative officials except those matters of an urgent nature, and such emergency matters, when so presented, shall have the written approval of the mayor before presentation. 
(Code 1968, § 1-203) 
Sec. 2-29. - Presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor, who shall take office every four years at the first meeting in January following the election, having been first elected by the duly qualified voters of the city at the regular city election in December. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. He shall state every question coming before the council, announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. 
(Code 1968, § 1-204) 
Sec. 2-30. - Call to order. 
The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order. In the absence of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. 
(Code 1968, § 1-205) 
Sec. 2-31. - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or deputy city clerk shall call the roll of the members and all city officials required to be present, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Code 1968, § 1-206) 
Sec. 2-32. - Quorum. 
A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding officer, shall, at the instance of any three members present, compel the attendance of absent members. 
(Code 1968, § 1-207) 
Sec. 2-33. - Attendance at meetings. 
Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the council, chief administrative officer, city clerk and mayor shall take their regular stations in the council chambers, and the business of the council shall be taken up for consideration. The city attorney, city engineer and city fiscal agent shall attend council meetings when requested to do so by the council. 
(Code 1968, § 1-208) 
Sec. 2-34. - Reading of minutes. 
Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 1-209) 
Sec. 2-35. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Code, the procedure of the council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Code 1968, § 1-210) 
Sec. 2-36. - Addressing the council. 
(a)  Generally. Any person desiring to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do; provided, however, that, under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any qualified person may address the council without securing such prior permission: 
(1)  Written communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council by written communications in regard to matters then under discussion. 
(2)  Oral communications. Taxpayers or residents of the city, or their authorized legal representatives, may address the council by oral communications on any matter concerning the city's business, or any matter over which the council has control; provided, however, that preference shall be given to those persons who have notified the city clerk in advance of their desire to speak in order that the communication may appear on the agenda of the council. 
(3)  Reading of protests, petitions, etc. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the council by the reading of protests, petitions or communications relating to zoning, sewer and street proceedings, hearings on protests, appeals and petitions or similar matters, in regard to matters then under consideration. 
(b)  Addressing council after motion has been made. After a motion is made by the council, no person shall address the council without first securing the permission of the council so to do. 
(c)  Manner of addressing council; time limit. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than the councilmembers and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a councilmember except through the presiding officer. 
(Code 1968, §§ 1-211—1-213) 
Sec. 2-37. - Silence to constitute affirmative vote. 
Unless a member of the council states that he is not voting, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(Code 1968, § 1-214) 
Sec. 2-38. - Decorum. 
(a)  Standards of conduct. 
(1)  Councilmembers. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and no member shall, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council, or disturb any member while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(2)  Persons addressing council. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the council, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the council. 
(b)  Enforcement of decorum. The chief of police, or such member of the police department as he may designate, shall be sergeant at arms of the council meetings. He shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest and remove such person from the meeting place. 
(Code 1968, §§ 1-215, 1-216) 
Sec. 2-39. - Appointment of special committees. 
All special committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer, unless otherwise directed by the council. 
(Code 1968, § 1-217) 
Sec. 2-40. - Standing committees. 
The only standing committee of the council shall be the committee of the whole. The president of the council shall be the presiding officer of the committee of the whole, and the rules of proceedings of the council shall be observed in the committee of the whole as far as the rules may be applicable. 
(Code 1968, § 1-218) 
Sec. 2-41. - Filing of protests. 
Any member of the council shall have the right to have reasons for his dissent from, or protest against, any action of the council entered on the minutes. 
(Code 1968, § 1-219) 
Sec. 2-42. - Ordinances, resolutions and contracts. 
(a)  Preparation of ordinances. All ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. No ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by the mayor or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(b)  Approval by administrative staff. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. All such instruments shall have first been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or contract document would devolve and shall have been approved by the department head. If approval is not given, then the instrument shall be returned to the mayor with a written memorandum of the reasons why such approval is withheld. If the questioned instrument is not redrafted to meet a department head objection, or objection is not withdrawn and approval in writing given, then the mayor shall so advise the council and give the reasons advanced by the department head for withholding approval. 
(c)  Introduction; sponsorship. Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council; except that the mayor or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution or other matter or subject be adopted. If not so sponsored, they shall not be considered. 
(d)  Date of final passage. No ordinance increasing taxes will be put on its final passage on the same day on which it was introduced. 
(e)  Reading and referral to committee. All ordinances concerning increasing taxes shall have two separate readings during regular council sessions. When an ordinance has had a first reading at a regular session and passed it shall then be referred to the committee of the whole or a special committee duly created. When the committee to which an ordinance has been referred shall report such ordinance to the council at a subsequent meeting, the ordinance shall stand for final action in accordance with the report of the committee, notwithstanding that such committee reports an amended or substituted ordinance, provided that such amendment or substitution is germane to the ordinance originally referred to such committee. An ordinance, after reference and report thereon, may be re-referred at any time previous to its final passage. 
(f)  Form of ordinances. No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and no ordinance, or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to existing ordinances or sections thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 1-221; Ord. No. 1985-5, 5-13-85) 
Secs. 2-43—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The city's retirement plan and its personnel rules and regulations are compiled and printed by the city. Official copies are on file in the city clerk's office, where they are available for reference during normal business hours. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-4(4); police, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - At-will employees. 
All employees of the City of Kingsland are at-will employees under Georgia Law and may be terminated for any or no reason. An at-will employee has no legitimate claim or entitlement to continued employment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 2-67. - Personnel policy. 
(a)  Rules and regulation covering city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, holidays, leave of absence, travel, employee appraisal and drug free work place are contained in the City of Kingsland's personnel policies and procedures manual, which is compiled and published by the City of Kingsland. An official copy of the manual is on file in the office of the city clerk, entitled "Employee Handbook and Guidelines"; and 
(b)  In the event, any provisions of the "Employee Handbook and Guidelines" conflicts or is inconsistent with this article, article III shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 4-9-2007) 
Secs. 2-68—2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-76. - Office established. 
The office of the city attorney is hereby established as an agency of the city. The office shall be composed of the city attorney and any other assistants, investigators, other employees or special counsel as may be necessary. The supervision and control of the agency is vested in the city attorney. 
Sec. 2-77. - Operating regulations for attorney's office. 
(a)  The city attorney may propose written regulations, or amendments thereto, to organize and operate the office of the city attorney in the most efficient manner reasonably possible, consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  These regulations shall become effective only after approval by the council and after being filed with the clerk of council, unless disapproved within 15 days of such filing by motion of the city council. 
(c)  The council may, by resolution, amend the regulations at any time. 
(d)  Violation of the regulations may be grounds for reprimand, demotion, suspension or discharge. 
(e)  Each officer and employee of the city attorney's office shall be furnished a copy of these regulations. 
Sec. 2-78. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and shall: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, the city council, the chief administrative officer or any city agency head upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the mayor or city council or any committee thereof, review the Code of Ordinances of the city and assist in maintaining an up-to-date code, properly indexed; 
(3)  Give his official opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted by the mayor or city council; 
(4)  Attend any city council meeting upon request of the council for the purpose of giving any legal advice required by its members; 
(5)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested, and approve as to form all bonds and city contracts; 
(6)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by resolution of the city council; 
(7)  Prepare and file any civil suit or action at law or equity to secure or protect the city's best interests, when so ordered by a resolution of the city council; 
(8)  Make a report to the mayor and the city council on the outcome of any litigation in which the city has a direct interest; 
(9)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by the city attorney to the city, or any department or official thereof; and 
(10)  Render any other legal services as may be required. 
Secs. 2-79—2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-10, adopted June 22, 2015 , amended and restated former Art. IV, §§ 2-96—2-120, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-24, adopted Nov. 10, 2003. 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-96. - Purpose, application, and duties of purchasing agent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the City of Kingsland, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(b)  Application. This article applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, and construction, entered into by the City of Kingsland after the effective date of this article, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by a public agency for public purchasing irrespective of the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
(c)  Duties of purchasing agent. The purchasing agent is responsible for ensuring that city departments comply with federal, state, and local statutes regulating competitive sealed bids, sealed proposals, professional services, cooperative purchases, emergency and sole-source purchases in a manner to yield the maximum value for each dollar spent. Other duties include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Observe and enforce the policy and procedures as outlined in the City of Kingsland Purchasing ordinance [this article] or as directed by the city manager and finance director or their designee; 
(2)  Advise and assist in the formulation of policies and procedures connected with the purchasing activities of the city and assist with conducting regular training sessions for employees involved in the purchasing process; 
(3)  Investigate and analyze research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental agencies and by private industry, in an effort to stay current on developments in the field of purchasing, price, market conditions and new products; 
(4)  Coordinate, organize, and assist departments in the specification writing process to ensure that specifications are written concisely and are not written in an exclusive manner; 
(5)  Join with other governmental agencies in cooperative purchasing plans when it is in the best interest of the city; 
(6)  Receive, open, and evaluate competitive solicitations and verify successful vendor; 
(7)  Prepare and coordinate with user departments staff reports recommending award of competitive solicitations for city council approval; 
(8)  Act as contract administrator for the city which includes, but not limited to: monitoring time lines for completion and rebidding contract at renewal dates, documenting compliance and complaint issues and steps taken to address these issues with the vendor; 
(9)  Combine purchases of similar items whenever possible and practical with city departments and surrounding governmental entities, to allow for better pricing and to establish a more competitive atmosphere; 
(10)  Assist department heads in the disposition of surplus city property. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-97. - Purchasing authority and delegation. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  All budgeted items are approved by the mayor and city council in the annual budget. Authorization levels below authorize the designee to proceed without further authorization from the mayor and city council. However, all contracts and bid awards in excess of $5,000.00 shall be presented to council for approval and award of successful bidder. 
(2)  Purchasing authority for budgeted items is as follows: 
a.  Department heads: $0.00—$500.00 
b.  Finance director: $0.00—$2,000.00 
c.  Fleet services director: $0.00—$2,500.00 (emergency purchases). 
d.  City manager: $0.00—and above. 
(3)  No person shall make any commitment for supplies, materials or services of any kind on behalf of the city except in accordance with city purchasing procedures. It is the responsibility of each user to ensure all purchases made for or by their department is consistent with and conforms to the current approved fiscal year budget prior to committing such funds. 
(4)  Every department shall maintain a log of any purchase under the amount of $500.00. This log will be submitted to the finance director on a weekly basis in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the finance department. The user shall generate a requisition prior to the purchase of all supplies and services which exceed $500.00. All such requests shall be pending until an approved purchase order is issued by the finance department and is returned to the user for order processing. 
a.  Receiving of goods and services. It shall be the responsibility of the user to ensure that all purchased goods and services are received, inspected and verified prior to approval for payment. 
b.  Disputes with vendor. Any disputes with the vendor regarding purchases of goods and services are to be handled by the user prior to approval of payment. If payment has already been made when the dispute arises, the purchasing agent shall assist when needed to insure resolution in a timely and efficient manner. Depending on the dollar amount involved in the dispute, acceptable resolution may also involve the finance director and city manager. 
c.  Payment processing. All receipts and invoices shall be directed to the finance department. Receipts or invoices received by a user must be submitted to the finance department within three working days. Payment terms (due date), unless specified on the vendor invoice, shall default to net 30 days. 
(b)  Delegation. With the approval of the mayor and city council, the city manager may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services, or construction items to other City of Kingsland officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
DIVISION 2. - SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION 
All purchases made on behalf of the City of Kingsland shall follow one of the following methods below, except for Public Works Projects in excess of $100,000. Public Works Projects, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(10), exceeding $100,000 shall comply with the provisions of the Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et. seq. The purchase of road construction contracts are subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et. seq. O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2(12). 
Part A. - Methods of Source Selection 

Sec. 2-98. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All contracts of the City of Kingsland shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in sections 2-99 (Competitive sealed proposals), 2-100 (Small purchases), 2-101 (Sole source procurement), and 2-102 (Emergency procurements) of this article. This process will generally be used for contracts and purchases in excess of $5,000.00. 
(b)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. No less than three businesses shall be solicited, in addition to all qualified local vendors in good standing with the city, to submit bids. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time, not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation reasonable time prior to bid opening. For public works contracts in excess of $100,000.00, the request shall be advertised in the legal organ of the city and/or on the city's website per O.C.G.A. § 36-91-20 a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bidding. The second advertisement shall follow not earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. 
(d)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection in accordance with Article 4 of the Open Records Act. 
(e)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluations that are not set forth in the invitation for bids. 
(f)  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the City of Kingsland or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
(1)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
(2)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the purchasing agent. 
(g)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements, criteria, and specifications set forth in the invitation for bids. This is the bidder who submits the lowest price, whose bid meets the specifications, who agrees to the contract terms and conditions with the city, and who is clearly capable of performing the resulting contract. All bid awards are subject to local vendor preference as stated in this Division 6 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-99. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the purchasing agent determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practical or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. This process generally will be used for contracts and purchases in excess of $5,000.00. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. No less than three businesses shall be solicited, in addition to all qualified local vendors in good standing with the city, to submit proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in subsection 2-98(c) (competitive sealed bidding, public notice) For public works contracts in excess of $100,000.00, the request shall be advertised in the legal organ of the city or on the city's website per O.C.G.A. 36-91-20 a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the sealed proposals. The second advertisement shall follow not earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after contract award. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. This is the offeror whose proposal most adequately meets the evaluation criteria set out in the request for proposal, who is able to reach mutually agreeable contract terms and conditions with the city and who is clearly capable of performing the resulting contract. All proposal awards are subject to local vendor preference as stated in Division 6 of this article. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-100. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General. Any contract not exceeding $5,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this Section. All local vendors in good standing with the City of Kingsland shall be afforded the opportunity to submit bids and/or quotes requested by the city. 
(b)  Small purchases $501.00—$5,000.00 Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of $500.00 and up to $5,000.0, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(c)  Small purchases under $500.0. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases under $500.00, no less than two businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(d)  Small purchases under $150.00. For small purchases under $150.00, users, or their designee(s), shall be authorized to make purchases up to $150.00 without competitive solicitation or issuance of a purchasing order provided such purchase complies with all applicable provisions of this article and is within the legal limits of the adopted budget. Authorized user will be required to log such purchases on the department's in-house requisition log. 
(e)  Split purchases. Purchases shall not be artificially divided in order to circumvent the dollar limitations and associated procedures established by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-101. - Sole source procurement. 
(a)  A contract may be awarded without competition when the purchasing agent determines in writing, after the user and purchasing agent conducts a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction item. The purchasing agent shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract, and the identification number of each contract file. 
(b)  The following expenditures are exempted from the competitive purchase requirements of this article; however, the city manager may develop procedures to oversee all transactions made by the entire city: 
(1)  Real estate acquisitions; 
(2)  Costs contained within intergovernmental agreements; 
(3)  Dues, memberships, and professional subscriptions; 
(4)  Utility services including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, and gas; 
(5)  Legal services; 
(6)  Legal and display advertisements (as required); 
(7)  Payments to professional services; such as, arbitrators, engineers, attorneys, etc.; 
(8)  Conferences, seminars, and classes; 
(9)  Software Renewal/licensing/maintenance (currently in use); 
(10)  Reimbursements for valid, approved travel expenses as submitted on a travel expense report; 
(11)  Instructors or speakers for internal training events; 
(12)  Surplus property acquisitions from other governments or governmental agencies; 
(13)  Employee benefits payments; 
(14)  Fuel purchases at the pump; and 
(15)  U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel Service, Federal Express, Airborne, or other delivery services. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-102. - Emergency procurements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city manager may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction items if immediate action is required to prevent disruption of operations or services, or when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety, and where the adverse effect of such emergency may worsen materially with the passage of time; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practical under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. All emergencies $10,000 or greater require ratification of the city council. 
(b)  Fleet services emergency purchases shall include items necessary for vehicles and equipment to keep the city operating. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-103. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any and all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the City of Kingsland. The reasons therefore shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be cancelled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interests of the city. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Part B. - Qualifications and Duties 

Sec. 2-104. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Determination of non-responsibility. If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a written determination of non-responsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the purchasing agent. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to supply promptly information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to such bidder or offeror. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the non-responsible bidder or offeror. The final determination shall be made part of the contract file and be made a public record. 
(b)  Right of nondisclosure. Information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the city outside of the office of the purchasing agent, or using agency, without prior written consent by the bidder of offeror. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-105. - Bid and performance bonds and insurance requirements. 
Bid,and performance bonds and insurance or other security may be requested for supply contracts or service contracts as the purchasing agent or head of an using agency deems advisable to protect the city's interests. 
(1)  Requirement for bid bonds. _Any such bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation and shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. Bid or performance bonds shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offeror's responsibility. 
(2)  Performance and payment bonds. Prior to execution of a contract for public works or construction projects, performance and payment bonds shall be delivered to the City as set forth below: 
a.  When required. Performance and payments bonds shall be required for all public works and construction projects when deemed appropriate by the purchasing agent, user department, consulting engineer, finance director, and/or city manager. Performance bonds shall be conditioned upon the bidder's faithful performance of the terms of the bid or proposal and the contract executed in connection therewith. Payment bonds shall be executed for the benefit of all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. All sureties must be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and listed in the Department of Treasury's publication of companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable reinsuring companies, circular 570. 
b.  Amount of performance and payment bonds. Both performance and payment bonds shall be in an amount equal to at least 100 percent of the total contract price. 
c.  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city of require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Insurance requirements. The city manager shall have the authority to determine what types and amounts of insurance coverage are reasonably necessary for the protection of the city's interest for all acquisitions covered by this article. Whenever possible, specific insurance requirements shall be stated within the request for bid or proposal; however, failure to do so shall not eliminate the authority of the city to require insurance coverage from successful bidder prior to the commencement of work. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-106. - City procurement records. 
(a)  Contract file. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award, and or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the city in a contract file by the purchasing agent. 
(b)  Retention of procurement records. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the city in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 2-107. - Specifications—Maximum practical competition. 
All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City of Kingsland's needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The requesting department shall submit a detailed scope of work and evaluation criteria to purchasing. Recommendations from support departments; such as fleet and information technology, shall be utilized when appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 433, § III(Exh. A), 6-15-2015) 
DIVISION 4. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 2-108. - Bid protests. 
(a)  Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the mayor and city council. Protestors are urged to seek resolution of their complaints initially with the purchasing agent. A protest with the respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know and should not have known of the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or the closing date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within 14 calendar days after such an aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto. 
(b)  Stay of procurements during protests. In the event of a timely protest under subsection (a) of this section, the purchasing agent shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted or until the mayor and city council makes a determination on the record that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city. 
(c)  Entitlement to costs. In addition to any other relief, when a protest is sustained and the protesting bidder or offeror should have been awarded the contract under the solicitation but is not, then the protesting bidder or offeror shall be entitled to the reasonable costs incurred in connection with the solicitation, including bid preparation costs other than attorney's fees. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-109. - Contract claims. 
(a)  Decision of the purchasing agent. All claims by a contractor against the city relating to a contract, except bid protests, shall be submitted in writing to the purchasing agent for a decision. The contractor may request a conference with the purchasing agent on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising under a contract, and those based upon breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation or other cause for contract modification or recision. 
(b)  Notice to the contractor of the purchasing agent's decision. The decision of the purchasing agent shall be promptly issued in writing, and shall be immediately mailed or otherwise furnished to the contractor. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision reached, and shall inform the contractor of its appeal rights under subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Finality of purchasing agent's decision; contractor's right to appeal. The purchasing agent's decision shall be final and conclusive unless, within fourteen calendar days from the date of receipt of the decision, the contractor mails or otherwise delivers a written appeal to the mayor and city council or commences an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Failure to render timely decision. If the purchasing agent does not issue a written decision regarding any contract controversy within seven days after written request for a final decision, or within such longer period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-110. - Authority of the purchasing agent to settle bid protests and contract claims. 
The purchasing agent is authorized to settle any protest regarding the solicitation or award of a City of Kingsland contract, or any claim arising out of the performance of a city contract, prior to an appeal to the mayor and city council or the commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-111. - Remedies for solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
(a)  Prior to bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals. If prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the solicitation shall be cancelled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
(b)  Prior to award. If after the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or a proposed award of contract is in violation of federal, state, or municipal law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be cancelled. 
(c)  After award. If, after an award, the purchasing agent, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a contract was in violation of applicable law, then: 
(1)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or 
b.  The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or 
(2)  If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith the contract may be declared null and void or voidable, if such action is in the best interests of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
DIVISION 5. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 

Sec. 2-112. - Criminal penalties. 
To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this division constitute violations of the Criminal Code of Georgia they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this part. Criminal, civil and administrative sanctions against employees or nonemployees which are in existence on the effective date of this article shall not be impaired. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-113. - Employee conflict of interest. 
(a)  It shall be unethical for any City of Kingsland employee to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the city employee knows that: 
(1)  The city employee or any member of the city employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract; or 
(2)  Any other person, business, or organization with whom the city employee or any employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract. 
(b)  A city employee or any member of a city employee's immediate family who holds a financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict deemed to have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that financial interest. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-114. - Gratuities and kickbacks. 
(a)  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any city employee or former city employee, or for any city employee or former city employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application. 
(b)  Kickbacks. If shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(c)  Contract clause. The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and solicitation therefor. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-115. - Prohibition against contingent fees. 
It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a City of Kingsland contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-116. - Contemporaneous employment prohibited. 
It shall be unethical for any city employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such a city employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-117. - Waivers from contemporaneous employment prohibition and other conflicts of interest. 
The mayor and city council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of interest provision (Section 2-113; Employee conflict of interest) or the contemporaneous employment provision (Section 2-116; Contemporaneous employment prohibited) upon making a written determination that: 
(1)  The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the city employee has been publicly disclosed; 
(2)  The city employee will be able to perform its procurement functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and 
(3)  The award will be in the best interest of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-118. - Use of confidential information. 
It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-119. - Sanctions. 
(a)  Employees. The mayor, city council, and/or city manager may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a city employee for violations of the ethical standards in this article: 
(1)  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
(2)  Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time; or 
(3)  Termination of employment. 
(b)  Nonemployees. The mayor and city council may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a nonemployee for violations for the ethical standards: 
(1)  Written warnings or reprimands; or 
(2)  Termination of contract. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-120. - Recovery of value transferred or received or received in breach of ethical standards 
(a)  General provisions. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical standards of this article by a city employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both city employee and nonemployee. 
(b)  Recovery of kickbacks by the city. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
DIVISION 6. - VENDORS 

Sec. 2-121. - Regulations for vendors. 
(a)  All vendors shall complete and submit all applicable forms in the city's vendor packet prior to conducting business with the city. Upon approval by the purchasing agent the vendor will become an active vendor of the city. 
(b)  Any vendor or contractor that defaults on their quoted price (sealed, written, or oral) without just cause shall be considered an irresponsible bidder and will be disqualified from doing business with the city for a length of time to be determined by the city manager and for finance director. 
(c)  The city shall not engage in purchasing from any vendor(s)/contractor(s) that have failed to secure, renew, or pay any fees required by the city. 
(d)  State contracts. When available and competitive, the use of state contracts is encouraged. State contracts are not automatically the lowest and in the best interest of the city; therefore, additional solicitation from other qualified vendors/contractors will still be required. 
(e)  Local vendor preference. 
(1)  General provisions. To provide for proposal/bid awards to be subject to a local vendor preference policy to allow local vendors to match the lowest price proposal, to provide for selection procedures for multiple qualifying local vendors, to require the policy to be stated in all applicable solicitations, to provide for exemptions. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Local vendor means a bidder or offeror which operates and maintains a brick and mortar business, i.e. a physical business address, within the limits of Camden County, GA and has a current business license, has paid in full all real and personal taxes owed the city, is considered a vendor in good standing with the city and can obtain an active vendor status. 
b.  Active vendor status means a vendor has completed and returned all necessary documents in the vendor packet. 
(3)  Opportunity to match. For purchases, bids, proposals or contracts less than $100,000.00 the local vendor may be given an opportunity to match the lowest price proposal, if the quotation or bid of the local vendor is within three percent of the lowest price proposal by a non-local vendor. In the event a local vendor matches the lowest price proposal, including all other terms, quality, service and conditions, then the local vendor shall be awarded the contract. 
(4)  Multiple local vendors. In the event the price proposal of more than one local vendor is within three percent of the lowest overall price proposal of a non-local vendor, the local vendor with the lowest proposal will be given the first opportunity to match the lowest overall price proposal. If this local vendor declines to match the price proposal, then the local vendor with the next lowest bid within three percent will be given the opportunity to match the lowest proposal. This process will continue with all local vendors having proposals within threepercent of the lowest overall bid by a non-local vendor. 
(5)  Policy to be stated. This policy shall be so stated in all applicable solicitations. 
(6)  Exemptions. This provision does not apply to public works construction projects or road projects pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. Any elected official, appointed official, employee or relative of any of these, who is in the position to influence the procurement process whether directly or indirectly, shall not do any business with the City except in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 and any other Georgia law(s) that may apply in the future. Any such transaction(s) that is in violation, unless approved in advance by the mayor and council, shall make any contract or other transaction(s) null and void. Officials or employees of the city shall remove themselves from the decision making process when there is an apparent or actual conflict of interest. 
(g)  E-Verify requirements. The Georgia E-Verify law requires contractors and all sub-contractors on Georgia public contracts for services over $2,499.99 in value to enroll in E-Verify, regardless of the number of employees. A contractor or sub-contractor may be exempt from this requirement if the contractor or sub-contractor has no employees and does not hire or intend to hire employees for the purpose of completing any part of the public contract. Certain professions are also exempt. For a public contract, contractors must sign the Contractor E-Verify Affidavit, all subcontractors must sign the Subcontractor E-Verify Affidavit and all Sub-subcontractors must sign the Sub-subcontractor Affidavit. The government agency is required to ensure that the Contractor E-Verify Affidavit is part of the contract; however, the contractor is responsible for all subcontractor affidavits and the subcontractors are responsible for the sub-subcontractors affidavits. E-Verify is not required for contracts solely involving the purchase of goods by a government agency. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
DIVISION 7. - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-122. - Procedure for the disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  Whenever departments have junk, scrap, and/or obsolete property that are determined to be surplus, these items shall be disposed of by the purchasing agent in compliance with this article. 
(b)  Departments shall forward list of surplus items to appropriate support departments (fleet and information technology). Support departments shall make the determination if items are surplus or if it can be transferred to another department. Support department shall submit list of items to council for approval of surplus declaration. After council approval is received, purchasing agent shall proceed with disposal process through public auction (internet or local), donation (another agency), or scrap (items with no monetary value). Proceeds from the sale of surplus property will be accounted for by each department's fund. 
( Ord. No. 2015-10, 6-22-2015 ) 
Secs. 2-123—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS TO CITY 

Sec. 2-151. - Procedures for acceptance. 
All sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The city finance director, with the approval of the mayor, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The mayor is authorized to enter into agreements with credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-6, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-152. - Discounts from face amounts. 
A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(Ord. No. 1996-6, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-153. - Surcharges. 
A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1996-6, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-154. - Cancellation of agreement by city. 
Any agreement with a credit card issuer for the acceptance of payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-6, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 2-155. - Final payments by card issuer; penalties for nonpayment. 
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. 
Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. No. 1996-6, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Secs. 2-156—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-08, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former Art. VI, §§ 2-176—2-200, in its entirety which pertained to a code of ethics for city council members and derived from Ord. No. 01-2000 adopted on Feb. 14, 2000. The code of ethics for city officials is contained in Article VII of this chapter. 

Secs. 2-176—2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - KINGSLAND CODE OF ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2010 adopted provisions for the Kingsland Code of Ethics. At the city's instruction these provisions have been placed into Article VII, §§ 2-231—2-240. 

Sec. 2-231. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-232. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-233. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-234. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(i)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(ii)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(iii)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to neither obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Kingsland nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Kingsland on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Kingsland. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-235. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-236. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the city council, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a two-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Kingsland. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city council for cause including, but not limited to, failure to maintain any requirement for qualification to serve on the board of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-237. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the board of ethics, who may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council or the board of ethics. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the chair of the board of ethics shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(c)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(d)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(e)  The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. 
(f)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to take evidence and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of the complaint and to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(g)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and; to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall have also had the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(h)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-238. - Decision. 
The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered in writing to the mayor and council within 14 calendar days after completion of the final hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-239. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for appeal in the Municipal Court of the City of Kingsland within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 2-240. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 2-241—2-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OPEN RECORDS 

Sec. 2-261. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Open Records Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Sec. 2-262. - Open records officer. 
There is hereby created the office of open records officer. The city clerk is hereby designated as the city's open records officer; the open records officer may designate, in writing, assistant open records officer(s) as required to perform the duties of his or her office. Before undertaking the duties of the office, the open records officer and assistant open records officers shall take an oath, in writing, to diligently perform such duties. Compensation for the open records officer and his or her assistant open records officers shall be included in the existing compensation for the position currently held by said officers. The open records officer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Sec. 2-263. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the open records officer and his or her duly designated assistant open records officer(s) to accept written requests to inspect and copy public records, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., and to produce to the requester all records responsive to a request within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request, unless the time for response is extended in accordance with law. No request shall be deemed filed until served upon the open records officer, either by hand delivery to the Officer at Kingsland City Hall, 107 South Lee Street, Kingsland, Georgia 31548; by certified United States mail, return receipt requested; by statutory overnight delivery; by email to loshaughnessy@kingslandgeorgia.com; or by facsimile transmission to (912) 729-7618. Oral requests and requests, whether oral or in writing, served upon any other officer or employee of the city shall not be deemed filed, until the requester has filed his or her request, in writing, with the open records officer. 
In the absence or unavailability of the open records officer, [7] an assistant open records officer shall perform the duties of the open records officer. The absence or unavailability of a designated open records officer shall not delay the city's response to a property served request. [8] 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
It is the intent that the open records officer be accessible within city hall during the normal hours of general operation of the city's administrative staff, i.e., 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except on recognized holidays and those days when city hall is closed. The open records officer shall coordinate his or her work schedule with the assistant open records officers to assure coverage within city hall during normal hours at all times when the open records officer is scheduled to be absent or unavailable for extended periods of time. Backup procedures will be implemented by the city manager to assure such coverage by assistant open records officers during the open records officer's unplanned absence or unavailability. 
 --- (8) --- 
By law, notice of the designation of open records officers shall be posted on the official bulletin board at city hall, in the Tribune and Georgian as legal organ of Camden County, and on the city's website. In addition, city officers, department managers, and administrative staff will be instruct on how to assist and direct persons desiring to request inspection and copying of public records. 

Sec. 2-264. - Request response. 
Upon receipt of a request, [9] it shall be the duty of the open records officer to promptly ascertain the availability of all public records responsive to the request and to produce to the requester those records that can be located and produced within a reasonable time, not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request. For purposes of computing the time within which a response must be made, the open records office shall not count the business day on which a request is received, nor any intervening Saturday, Sunday, or designated holiday on which city offices are closed for general business. Upon intake of a request, the open records officer shall stamp the request with the date and time of receipt, and initial the request. In any instance where records are unavailable within three business days of the request, it shall be the duty of the open records officer to provide the requester with a written description of such records and a timeline for when the records will be available for inspection or copying and to provide the responsive records to the requester as soon thereafter as practicable. Such response shall also contain a good faith estimate of the cost to the requester for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production and copying of records. 
The open records officer shall confer with every officer or department manager of the city, as necessary, to ascertain the existence of public records responsive to a request (including electronically-stored information), and it shall be the duty of every city officer and department manager to confer with and provide records, or true and correct copies of the originals thereof, to the open records officer promptly, time being of the essence. Upon receipt of a public record responsive to a request, the open records officer shall determine, in consultation with the city attorney if necessary, if the record is exempt from disclosure by order of a court of this state or by law; if the record is exempt from disclosure, the written response by the open records officer shall set forth the specific legal authority under which withholding of inspection of the record is claimed. The open records officer shall maintain a log or other documentation of his or her due diligence to comply with a proper request. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
To further assist persons desiring to inspect records, a request form will be available at city hall and on the city's website. 

Sec. 2-265. - Fees. 
The open records officer shall further have the duty to collect from a requester a reasonable charge for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of records, utilizing the most economical means available to identify and produce non-excluded records. The charge for the search, retrieval, or redaction of records shall not exceed the prorated hourly salary of the lowest paid full-time employee who, in the reasonable discretion of the open records officer, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request; provided, however, no charge shall be made for the first quarter hour. In addition thereto, where certified copies of specific records are sought, the fees for certified copies prescribed by law shall apply; otherwise, a fee for the copying of records shall not exceed ten cents per page for letter or legal size documents or, in the case of other documents and electronic records, the actual cost of reproducing the document or media on which the records or media are produced. It shall be the right of the requester, at the time of inspection, to make photographic copies or other electronic reproductions of records, at his or her own expense, using suitable portable devices brought to the place of inspection. Whenever any person has requested to inspect and copy public records and received a written response estimating the cost of the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of the records responsive to the request, and the city has actually incurred such costs but the requester fails to inspect or accept copies of the records, the open records officer shall be authorized to collect such charges in any manner authorized by law. 
In any instance in which the open records officer has estimated costs in excess of $25.00 for responding to a request, the open records officer may defer the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of the records until the requester has stated, in writing, his or her willingness to pay an amount equal to the estimate of costs. In any instance in which the estimated costs exceed $500.00, the open records officer shall insist, in writing, upon prepayment of the estimated costs prior to beginning search, retrieval, redaction, production or copying of the records. In any instance in which a requester has outstanding costs owing to the city for a previous records request, the open records officer shall insist upon prepayment of the outstanding costs and estimated costs prior to beginning search and retrieval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Sec. 2-266. - Litigation. 
Requests by civil litigants, or their counsel of record, in any ongoing civil action or administrative proceeding shall be made in writing and shall include the style of the action or proceeding, the names and addresses of all parties and, if a party is represented by counsel, the name, address, and telephone number of the party's attorney; a copy of the request shall be served by the requester upon all parties or their counsel of record in the action or proceeding contemporaneous to filing the written request with the open records officer. The open records officer shall make duplicate set(s) of records provided in response to the request available to all parties or their counsel for the cost of copies only, unless a party or its counsel elects not to receive the records and pay the copying charge. If the city is a party to the action or proceeding, a set of responses shall be provided to counsel for the city at no charge. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Sec. 2-267. - Training. 
The open records officer and assistant open records officer(s) shall, prior to assuming the duties of their office, undergo a course of training in public records management and specifically compliance with the Georgia Open Records Law, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., as approved by the city manager, in consultation with the city attorney, if necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk, as the city's public records manager designated at section 19 of the Charter of the Code of Kingsland, Georgia, and the open records officer, at least annually, to conduct a workshop for city officers and department managers on the minimum requirements and procedures for public records management and open records disclosure, including the penalties or civil fines that may be imposed for violating Georgia's public records laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 8-26-2013) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-14, adopted July 23, 2007, deleted and replaced the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-37, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-23, adopted Oct. 13, 2003. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference— Taxation and revenue, Ch. 20; excise tax on liquor by the drink, § 20-76 et seq.; adult entertainment, § 11-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Liquor, Malt Beverage and Wine Ordinance of the City of Kingsland." 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural number. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bona fide nonprofit civic organization means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c), (d) or (e). Proof of the non-profit status shall be by current valid copy of IRS 501-C3 or equivalent certification. Status will be not granted simply based on verbal or written representation of the applicant. 
Brewpub shall mean any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. Code Section 3-5-36. As used in this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, as authorized pursuant to subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. Code Section 3-5-36 shall not be used. 
Building shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons. 
Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Kingsland. 
Consumption on premises shall mean the sale or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. The license issued to such person shall be known as a "consumption on premises license." 
Department shall mean the Department of Revenue, State of Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Gallon or wine gallon shall mean a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of 231 cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Individual shall mean a natural person. 
Keg means barrel or bulk container of malt beverage commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
License officer is the administrative officer of the City of Kingsland Business License Department. 
Licensed premises shall mean the building and real property described in the license application as approved by the city council where the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wines is permitted to be sold. 
Licensed retailer shall mean any person (not a producer) selling or offering to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine in an original package not for consumption on the premises where sold and holding a valid license issued by the City of Kingsland and the State of Georgia. 
Licensed wholesaler shall mean any person (not a producer) who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for purposes of resale to licensed retailers, to licensed wholesalers, or to persons holding a "consumption on premises license." 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container, as delivered by a licensed wholesaler to licensed retailer. 
Package store shall mean a store licensed by the State of Georgia to sell distilled spirits not for consumption on premises. 
Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or any combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Retail consumption dealer shall mean any person who sells or offers to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term shall have the same meaning as the term "retail package liquor store." 
Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means all alcoholic beverages containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruit, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2012-06, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-3. - In certain retail establishments only—For consumption on premises. 
Alcoholic beverages, wine or malt beverages shall not be sold at retail for consumption on premises except in the following types of businesses: 
(1)  In restaurants, other than fast food restaurants, serving prepared food which is offered to the general public. Such establishments shall be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants and shall meet the criteria set out in subsection 3-7(e) of this chapter. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a fast-food restaurant is defined as a restaurant that derives more than 15 percent of its sales by use of a carry-out window serving persons outside the building, who are either on foot or who are the occupants of motor vehicles. 
(2)  In hotels or motels, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public to be a place where food is served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate rates to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 15 or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations for guests, and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and with a seating capacity for at least 50 people, and where at least two meals a day are regularly served to such guests. 
(3)  In private clubs organized and existing under the laws of the state, or a bona fide association of individuals organized for fraternal purposes, conducted solely for the benefit of its members and their beneficiaries, operated on the lodge system with ritualistic form of work, having a representative form of government and at least 25 regular members paying monthly dues, where no part of the net earnings of which shall inure to the benefit of any shareholder or member, provided further that no member, officer or agent, or employee of the club is compensated, directly or indirectly, by any form of commission or other compensation based on the amount of profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members or by its governing body out of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this subsection, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits hereunder. 
(4)  Golf course club houses. 
(5)  In bowling alleys, provided that the following rules and regulations are followed: 
a.  No alcoholic beverages will be served in the bowling alley, except through a service window and then only when delivered directly to the customer at that location; 
b.  No alcoholic beverages will be consumed in the area of the bowling lanes, but only in a seating area set aside for spectators located separately and apart from the bowling lanes; and 
(6)  Malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises, in addition to the places set out in subparagraphs a. through c. of this section, may also be sold in refreshment stands, beverages carts, or club houses located within the boundaries of golf courses. 
(7)  Any licensed establishment permitting persons to bring their own alcoholic beverages into the premises for consumption on premises (brown bagging) shall comply with all requirements of this chapter regarding operation of their establishment with the exception of payment of excise taxes for drinks sold (except as to alcoholic beverages sold by them). Subject to subsection 3-7(6)(f). 
(8)  In billiard hall where the game of pool is played provided the following rules and regulations are followed: 
a.  The sale of alcohol beverage sales shall be limited to beer and wine only. 
(9)  Brewpub eating establishments; 
(10)  In a brewery subject to limitations of their state license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-3.1. - Unlawful practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages of any kind who derives more than 20 percent of their gross annual income from the sale of such alcoholic beverages to permit, perform, promote, advertise, stage, suffer, or in any way to allow any person to expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities in, on or about the licensed premises. 
Definitions: As used in this section, these terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral and anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, or oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic and lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-4. - Sale of distilled spirits and fortified wine—Not for consumption on premises. 
No packaged sales of distilled spirits for off-premise consumption shall be allowed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-5. - Sale of malt beverages and wine—Not for consumption on premises. 
No malt beverages or wines shall be sold at retail except as follows: 
(1)  In retail stores devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products to the general public and located in zoning districts in which food or convenience stores are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where existing food or convenience stores exist as a nonconforming use. In order for a store to be devoted principally to the sale of groceries and food products, the building must contain at least 1,000 square feet and 60 percent of the retail floor area of the building must be devoted exclusively to the sale of groceries or related grocery items. For the purpose of this chapter, groceries and related grocery items are defined so as to exclude any drinks containing any amount of alcohol. 
(2)  In a facility duly licensed by the city to sell at retail alcoholic beverages in the original unbroken package. 
(3)  In a marina providing space to secure moorings for boats, motorboats and yachts and offering or supplying repairs, fuels, refreshments and other facilities. 
(4)  In a licensed brewpub subject to the volume limitations of O.C.G.A. 3-5-24.1(a)(2). 
(5)  In a licensed brewery subject to the volume limitations of O.C.G.A. 3-5-24.1(a)(2). 
No malt beverages or wines shall be sold at wholesale except as follows: 
(1)  In a licensed brewpub to a state licensed wholesale dealer; 
(2)  To a licensed wholesale dealer. 
All licensees selling kegs of malt beverage shall, at the time of the sale of such, record the serial number of the keg along with the name and address of the buyer. Further, the licensee shall require the buyer to provide documentation, in the form of a driver's licenses, etc., to verify the identity of the buyer. Said record shall be maintained for a period of six months, and shall be provided to the Kingsland Police Department upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-6. - Hotel in-room service license. 
Any hotel, motel, inn or other establishments which meets the requirements set out in subsection 3-3(2) is hereby authorized to provide in-room service as defined in this section. In order to qualify for a hotel-in-room service, the applicant must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicant must be the current holder of a retail dealer license, a retail consumption dealer license, a retail beer dealer license or a retail wine dealer license; provided, however, the applicant may only qualify for a hotel in-room service for the type of alcoholic beverage for which he holds a current license. 
(2)  Applicant shall apply on a form provided by the City of Kingsland Business License Department specifying the type of in-room service license sought (beer, wine, distilled spirits or any combination thereof) together with any other forms, documentation, or other information required by the city council. 
(3)  A hotel in-room service licensee shall be authorized to deliver alcoholic beverages, either by the package or by the drink, if the hotel holds a valid in-room service license, by a hotel employee to a registered guest's room when such distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages, at the time of the delivery; provided further, however, such sale shall be evidenced by a signed receipt indicating which guest ordered alcoholic beverages, indicating the identification and quantity of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine actually delivered; provided, however, that the hotel may provide the guest with a credit for any unused and unopened alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  All hotels having in-room service shall comply with all requirements promulgated by the Department of Revenue of the State of Georgia dealing with storage of alcoholic beverages and records required to be maintained in order to provide hotel in-room service. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by hotel guest in quantities otherwise permitted by O.C.G.A., Title 3. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-7. - Hours of sale. 
The following hours of sale are hereby established for the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine: 
(1)  Licensed retailers shall not sell distilled spirits in the package for hotel in-room service, at any time on Sundays or Christmas Day or on any other day during the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(2)  Licensed retailers including brewpubs and breweries shall not sell wine or malt beverages in the package for consumption off the premises, or hotel in-room service, at any time on Christmas Day, or any other day between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday before 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. 
(3)  Except as set forth in subsection 3-7(4) through (6), alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine sold for consumption on the premises, shall not be sold on Sundays. No alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall be sold on any other day of the week between the hours of 2:01 and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises may be sold on Sundays until 1:45 a.m. in private clubs, bona fide full-service restaurants, brewpubs, and breweries. All customers shall vacate the licensed premises by 2:00 a.m. and no drink order shall be placed or filled subsequent to 1:45 a.m. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises may also be sold on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. In bona fide full-service restaurants. As used in this subsection the term "bona fide full-service restaurant" shall mean an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wines and which also meet the following additional requirements. 
a.  Where meals with substantial entree selected by patrons are served; 
b.  Has adequate facilities and sufficient full-time employees to prepare, cook and serve meals for consumption at tables in a dining room located in the licensed premises; 
c.  Derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the sale of meals prepared, cooked and consumed on the licensed premises as determined by totaling all of combined retail outlets located on the licensed premises; and 
d.  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wines may only be served as an accessory to a food service. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine for consumption on premises may also be sold on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. In full-service hotels and motels. As used in this subsection, the term "full-service hotel or motel" means an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine for which also meet the following additional requirements. 
a.  Derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; 
b.  Has a bona fide full-service restaurant owned and operated by the licensee on the licensed premises; 
c.  Has meeting facilities and banquet rooms capable of seating a minimum of 50 people; 
d.  Pays hotel and motel taxes to the city; 
e.  Advertises itself as providing short-term transient accommodations to the public on 24 hour a day basis, seven days a week; and 
f.  Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine shall be served in meeting room facilities from a service bar located in such room. Alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine shall not be served in the lounge area of a hotel or motel unless it is closed to the general public, but such area may be used for a private party catered by the hotel or motel. 
(7)  Alcoholic beverages either in the unbroken package or by the drink for consumption on premises, may be sold on a primary or election day; provided, however, that no such sale shall take place within 250 feet of a polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during such time as the polls are opened. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2013-05, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2014-04, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-8. - Required for sale or possession for sale and possession for consumption on premises. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine when such person does not hold a valid license issued by the city and the state to sell or possess for sale such items. It shall also be a violation of this chapter for any business required to purchase a business license under Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances, Kingsland, Georgia to permit any person to consume alcoholic beverages of any kind on the premises of such business without first securing an alcoholic beverage license as provided herein; except that private meetings of employees of any such business and not more than five non-employees shall not be regulated hereby. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-9. - Application on form prescribed by city council. 
Any person desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application therefore on a form to be furnished by the city, and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits and other supporting data as required thereby. Any knowingly, untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information contained in any such application shall be cause for denial or suspension and if a license has been granted, shall be cause for revocation of the same. Each application shall be filed together with a certified check or cashier's check in payment of the license fee, and if an initial application, the investigation fee required by section 3-12 of this chapter. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Where the owner of such business is an individual (a natural person), the application shall be made in that name and the complete address of the applicant, together with applicant's Social Security number, shall be listed. The application submitted shall include three references. These references shall not be relatives or current or future employees of the applicant. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a domestic corporation lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the state, or any foreign corporation lawfully registered under the laws of the state to do business in this state, the applicant may be permitted to apply for such license in the name of the corporation as registered in the Office of the Secretary of State. The applicant shall provide the licensing officer with the name of its agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of this state and also provide the licensing officer with the address of its registered office. 
(3)  The written application for a license on file in the City of Kingsland Business License Department shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current with correct information at all times. The failure to maintain a current license application shall be grounds for revocation of a license. 
(4)  The council may, in the exercise of its discretion, require a personnel statement as to any employee or agent of an applicant for licensing purposes. 
(5)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a felony of the owner, agent or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving moral turpitude. 
(6)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of a misdemeanor of the owner, agent or any proposed employee for any offense under federal, state or local law involving alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, in any form; gambling or tax law violations. 
(7)  The license application shall list the names of any persons having financial interest in the operation of a proposed licensed premises or control over or ownership interest in such proposed license premises. Such persons must meet the same requirements as set forth in this chapter for the licensee. 
(8)  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, and the location thereof. 
(9)  If the proposed licensed premises is not in existence or requires substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and working drawings showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises and the construction proposed to be carried out by the applicant and the anticipated time for completion of said construction or renovation. 
(10)  As a prerequisite to the issuance to any license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant or any managing officer. Upon written recommendation of the Chief of Police of the City of Kingsland this requirement may be waived by the license officer. 
(11)  Such other information as the license officer under the direction of the city council may require. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-10. - Consideration for a license. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of the chapter, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, and mental capacity to conduct this business, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he or she has resided, and whether or not applicant is likely to maintain the operation of the business for which he or she is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
(2)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as it pertains to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; and 
(4)  Whether a person has previously had a similar license suspended or revoked and the reason therefore. 
(5)  The city council shall also give consideration to such other factors as may affect the health and general welfare of the incorporated area of the city, to include the type of license applied for, the effect that license will have on schools, public parks and churches in the area, the effect the granting of the license will have on existing land uses in the area, the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for the particular use sought, and the congestion of roads and streets. These items shall receive reasonable consideration with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, and sustaining the stability of neighborhood property values. 
(6)  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the city council that such license or application fails to meet any of the factors or requirements of subsection (5) of this section or in any case where such a decision was made because of the undesirability of the location itself, no application can be made until at least one year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
(7)  When any application is denied or any license is revoked because of a decision by the city council that such licensee or applicant fails to meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (4) of this section or in any case where such a decision was made because of the ineligibility of the applicant to receive or the licensee to retain an alcoholic beverage license, that applicant or former licensee may not apply for an alcoholic beverage license in the city until at least one year has elapsed from the date the previous application was denied or revoked or, if that decision was appealed to any court, until one year after a final, unappealed or unappealable disposition was made of such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-11. - Persons prohibited from holding licenses. 
Licenses shall not be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(2)  A person who has in Georgia or any other jurisdiction been convicted of a misdemeanor or a violation of a municipal or county ordinance involving driving under the influence of intoxicants or drugs, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge of the same within the preceding two years. 
(3)  A person who has in Georgia or any other jurisdiction been convicted of a felony, or who has pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any charge of the same within the preceding five years. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted or pled nolo contendere or forfeited bond for a violation of a law or ordinance pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages or the sale or possession of a controlled substance within the preceding five years. 
(5)  A partnership, unless all partners qualify. 
(6)  A person whose place of business is managed, operated or owned by a person who could not acquire a license hereunder, except as to the residence requirements herein above provided. 
(7)  Any person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine has been revoked by any licensing authority, during the immediately preceding five years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-12. - Processing application. 
(a)  All applications filed with the license officer after investigation of the fitness of the applicant and the proposed location shall be approved or disapproved by the city council at a public meeting. In cases where applications are disapproved, the Clerk of the City of Kingsland shall return the amount of the fee submitted with the application to the applicant (excluding in the case of a new application, the investigative fee). In cases where such applications are approved by the council, the council shall issue a proper license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the particular business and at the particular location applied for. All new license applications shall, in addition to the license fee, include a non-refundable fee in the amount of $250.00 to cover the cost of the investigation into whether or not applicant should be granted the license applied for. 
(b)  Copies of each application received shall be forwarded to the following offices: (l) building inspector's office; (2) police chief; (3) community planning and development director; and (4) if a hotel, motel restaurant, lounge, or private club to the Camden County Health Department for their recommendations. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing on the application for the license shall be published once a week for two weeks in the official newspaper of the city wherein legal advertisement are published. After the application is complete and all information is received by the license officer, a public hearing will be scheduled on the application by the council. In addition, if the proposed location does not have an existing license, a sign shall be posted by the license officer on premises at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  The council shall have full power to determine whether the applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter is a fit and proper person to operate the type of business involved, and whether the location of such business is proper and in the best interest of the city, and the council's determination of these requirements shall be final, except where a right of appeal exists under applicable law. 
(e)  An approved application for an alcohol license by the Kingsland City Council shall be temporary in nature until the applicant receives a valid state license. The license shall become permanent until the noted expiration when the applicant provides the city with a copy of the valid state license. In the event the license is denied by the state or a copy of the state license is not submitted to the city within 45 days of city council approval, the City of Kingsland alcohol license shall become void immediately. 
(f)  All decisions denying, suspending or revoking such license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-13. - Initial application. 
(a)  Persons making an application for a license to operate existing licensed premises may be issued a temporary license for a period not to exceed 90 days by the city council. Before a temporary license is issued, the applicant must have filed a complete application, and the following documents and material must be furnished to the council: 
(1)  A valid state application with all questions answered which indicates that applicant is eligible to hold the license sought; and 
(2)  When preliminary records check indicates applicant is eligible to hold license; 
(b)  All persons making an application for an initial license shall be notified of the requirement to attend the hearing on such application and to answer such questions and provide such information as the city council deems necessary and proper. If the applicants fail to appear at such hearings, the application shall be deferred to the next meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the next meeting, the application shall be treated as having been withdrawn. 
(c)  The issuance of any provisional license pursuant to the above conditions is within the discretion of the city council and such temporary license may be withdrawn by the city council at any time without notice or hearing, if final record check, including the response to the fingerprint search shows applicant was not entitled to the license issued. 
(d)  If the application is filed prior to July 1 of a particular license year, the full license fee shall be paid. If the application is filed after July 1, the license fee shall be one-half the amount of the normal license fee charged for the entire year. The investigation fee shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-14. - Fee scale. 
Before such license shall be granted, the applicant shall pay a regulatory fee in accordance with the following scale: 
(1)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits, having a place of business located in the corporate city limits of the City of Kingsland, $1,500.00. 
(2)  Wholesale dealers in wine, having a place of business located in the corporate city limits area of the City of Kingsland, $1,500.00 per year. 
(3)  Wholesalers of malt beverages, having a place of business located in the corporate city limits of the City of Kingsland, $1,500.00 per year. 
(4)  Any combination license for wholesalers of malt beverage, wine, and/or distilled spirits, having a place of business in the corporate city limits of the City of Kingsland, $2,000.00 per year. 
(5)  A combination license to sell malt beverages and wine at retail in original packages, not to be consumed on premises at the same location where the malt beverage and wine may be un-chilled, chilled, iced or refrigerated, $1,000.00 per year. 
(6)  Retail dealers in wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises, $1,000.00 per year. 
(7)  A combination license to sell distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages at retail where it is to be consumed on the premises, $1,500.00 per year. 
(8)  Hotel in-room service licensee shall pay an additional regulatory fee in an amount equal to the fee charged to a licensed retailer ($1,500.00 per year). 
(9)  The manufacturer of alcoholic beverages whose plant is located in the corporate city limits of the City of Kingsland shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per year. 
(10)  Wine only service no more than four times a year where licensee is not engaged in selling and consumption is limited to the premise shall pay a license fee of $150.00 a year. 
(11)  Beer and wine by the drink at festivals and benefits, $180.00. 
(12)  Brewpubs as defined herein, $500.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2009-02, 3-9-2009; Ord. No. 2012-06, 8-27-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04 , 5-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-15. - Expiration; renewal. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each license year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file the alcohol license renewal application together with the requisite fee with the business license officer on the form provided for renewal of a license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before December 1 of each year, otherwise no license, except for cause as approved by mayor and council, shall be renewed. If a license is not renewed in a timely manner, the application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of license to the same extent as if no previous license had been held. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-16. - Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, school buildings, or other sites. 
(a)  (1)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
a.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any fee simple ownership church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
b.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subparagraph shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subparagraph apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
c.  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This paragraph shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of Code Section 20-2-690. 
(b)  The city council may grant an exception to distance requirements as hereinbefore set forth to a proposed location for the sale of beer and wine in the original package and not for consumption on premises of not more than 50 percent, if the council finds the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The proposed site is located in an area of Kingsland where numerous establishments are licensed to sell malt beverages and wine and which were licensed prior to the adoption of this chapter (or insert date); and 
(2)  The property line of the proposed site to be licensed is separated from the property line of a school, college, church or recognized place of worship by a public road having a right-of-way of not less than 100 feet in width; or 
(3)  The property line of the proposed site to be licensed is separated from the property line of a school, college, or a fee simple ownership church or recognized place of worship by a permanent, natural or physical barrier of such nature as to render it highly unlikely that the distance of travel on the ground, between the two property lines, would be less than 600 feet. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to an existing licensed premises, licensed under this or any proceeding ordinance during the preceding 12 months. 
(d)  For purposes of this Code section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of legal public travel on the ground. The planning director or designated staff shall confirm the distances in the field to the best of their ability. The applicant may provide a signed and sealed survey provided by a Georgia licensed professional engineer of the property with the distances shown to the appropriate adjacent structure as measured in the field by said Georgia registered surveyor. 
A fee simple ownership church property shall mean a property owned in fee simple by an officially registered religious body and actively used for religious purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2008-16, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-17. - Leased premises. 
In the event premises for which a license is sought is part of a larger parcel of land, which would not qualify for a license, because of the proximity to school, college, church or recognized place of a worship as defined in section 3-16 of this chapter, a license may nevertheless be issued by the council, provided the applicant meets the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The owner of the larger tract of land does not own or have a direct or indirect financial interest in the business sought to be licensed (other than the payment of rents). The lease does not require the lessee to pay to the lessor a percentage of profits based upon the amount of sales. 
(2)  The owner has agreed to lease the premises to applicant for a period of at least one year. 
(3)  The lease in the opinion of the council is an arms length transaction. 
(4)  The leased premises, as described in the application, if owned by applicant, would meet the requirement of section 3-16 of this chapter. 
(5)  The leased premises do not exceed 50 percent of the land area or larger parcel of land. 
(6)  The lease is not between any of the following parties: 
a.  Person related by blood or marriage; 
b.  Affiliated companies or corporation; 
c.  Officers, director and stockholders (including family members) of a corporation and a corporation; 
d.  Persons who have no other financial or business relationship between themselves. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-18. - Display at place of business. 
The City of Kingsland License shall at all times be displayed in plain view at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-19. - Transferability. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferred from one location to another. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable from one party to another. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-19.1. - Issuance of temporary permit for sale by nonprofit civic organizations. 
The temporary permit may be issued as hereinafter set out: 
(1)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee of $180.00 by a bona fide nonprofit civic organization to the city, the council may issue a permit authorizing the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises for a period not to exceed three days, subject to any provision of the ordinance from which this section was derived or state law regulating the time for the selling of such beverages. The fee is for the city's administrative costs, including advertising, in processing the application. 
(2)  No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to the ordinance from which this section was derived. The organization must also obtain a permit from the state revenue commissioner. 
(3)  The permit issued to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. All permits for festivals and benefits conducted by nonprofit civic organizations shall specify that all sales and consumption shall be within a predefined controlled area enclosed by a tent or fencing, and that all beverages are served in paper or plastic containers. No permit may be issued unless sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, 8-27-2012) 
Sec. 3-20. - Refund. 
No fees paid for an alcoholic beverage license shall be refunded whether partially or in full once the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-21. - License granted only after licensed premises receives a certificate of occupancy. 
No license other than a provisional license shall be granted under this chapter until the business establishment referred to in the license application has been granted a certificate of occupancy by the City of Kingsland Building Inspector's Office. A provisional license will be issued by the council to the applicant for a location not previously licensed, provided reasonable assurances are given to the council that he promises, when all work is completed, will fully comply with this Chapter, the City of Kingsland Zoning Ordinance and the City of Kingsland Building Codes. The provisional license for a new location shall not entitle the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages until such time as the necessary work has been inspected and approved by all county agencies having jurisdiction thereof and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City of Kingsland Building Inspector. When all necessary approvals have been obtained, the license officer shall issue the license previously applied for and approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-22. - Consumption on premises and package license. 
A license holder may apply for and obtain both the license for sales in original package except for distilled spirits and for consumption on the premises, but the sale of such items must be in separate establishments having independent entrances. This section shall not apply to hotel in-room service, brewpubs and breweries. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-23. - Compliance with applicable laws necessary. 
Each licensee shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and statutes of the state, and all local ordinances, and shall, in addition thereto or in furtherance thereof: 
(1)  Prohibit the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages in automobiles or other vehicles, or anywhere outside the main building or accessory thereto in which the business of such licensee is operated, except as provided for in subsection 3-3(5) of this chapter; 
(2)  Strictly adhere to the laws of the state respecting the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors, intoxicated persons or habitual drunkards. The term "minor" shall be construed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. 
(3)  Shall keep the licensed premises free and clear of cans, bottles, paper and other debris; 
(4)  No one other than the holder of the license for consumption on the premises, except for a hotel, motel or inn, during normal business hours, shall carry into any licensed premises any alcoholic beverages in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened; 
(5)  The holders of license for consumption on the premises shall not knowingly permit the purchaser to carry off the licensed premises any alcoholic beverage; this section does not apply to brewpubs and breweries. 
(6)  The licensees shall not sell to, give away, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverage by any minor as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et seq. or by any person who is mentally incompetent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-24. - Employment of minors restricted. 
(a)  No licensee hereunder shall employ any minor in his establishment; provided, however, that in hotels, motels, and restaurants as defined herein, minors 18 years of age or below may be employed where their duties are not in any way involved with the preparation of, taking orders for, selling, or the service of any alcoholic beverages; provided that musicians and other entertainers 18 years of age or below may provide professional entertainment in the licensed premises with permission of the Chief of Police of the City of Kingsland Police Department. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-25. - Revocation hearing. 
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter is granted as a mere privilege and not a right. Upon violation of any provision of this chapter or of any law or regulation of the state relating to alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, the council, at a regular or specifically called meeting, after reasonable written notice of the pending violations to the license and after said licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard as to the proposed grounds for revocation, may revoke or suspend the license. When a license is revoked or suspended, no portion of the license fee shall be refundable. 
The city manager, upon the recommendation of the chief of police, may temporarily suspend any license involving the sale of alcoholic beverages if the manner of operation poses a serious safety or health hazard, for a period not to exceed 30 days pending a hearing and final action by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-26. - Denial, suspension or revocation of a license. 
The council may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license required under this chapter if: 
(1)  The license application is not filed in good faith or is filled by some person as a subterfuge for any other person. 
(2)  Any applicant for a license or any license under this chapter willfully fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or with rules and regulations adopted by the council. 
(3)  Any person to whom a license has been issued is no longer engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, malt beverages or wine, or no longer qualifies as a licensee under this chapter. 
(4)  In the event applicants permit the licensed premises to be operated in a disorderly manner so as to constitute a public nuisance after (i) applicant has been advised in writing by the Kingsland Police Chief of the unsatisfactory manner in which the business is being operated and (ii) after applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure said deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-27. - Notice of hearing. 
All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefore stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. Within 30 days of any such decision, any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the council regarding a license shall be afforded by a public hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses if requested by such applicant in writing filed with the city clerk within 30 days of the decision from which relief is sought. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-28. - Limitations as to nature of business. 
Upon and after the date of the adoption of this chapter, no future original alcoholic beverage, malt beverage or wine license of any type shall be issued to a business or person that does not meet the standards set out in this chapter. It is further provided that any location heretofore licensed to operate any of the businesses described herein, wherein a different method of ascertaining minimum distances was used, or other requirements imposed, may continue to operate such business at the present location, without being deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-29. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
No retailer shall purchase for use at licensed place of business, any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed by the state. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-30. - Excise tax on wholesale alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The city by this chapter pursuant to O.C.G.A § 3-4-80, does hereby levy an excise tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages by licensed wholesalers at the maximum amount prescribed by state law per liter on a proportionate tax at like rates on any fractional part of a liter on distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages (i.e. spirituous liquors), excluding fortified wine. This tax shall be collected by the city finance department; 
(b)  Every licensed wholesaler shall file a monthly report with the city finance director on a form prescribed by the city finance director, which form shall set forth the total quantity of distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages sold during such month and shall have attached to it legible copies of all invoices covering said sales. Such monthly report shall be filed not later than the 20th day of the next month following the month of sale. The report shall be accompanied by a local check or cashiers check in the full amount of the tax due. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed a penalty equal to ten percent of the taxes due upon each licensed wholesaler who fails to file a timely report and pay the tax due. If the city finance director with the concurrence of the city attorney, determines that the tax deficiency or any part thereof is due to fraud with intent to evade the tax, the council may assess a penalty equal to 50 percent of the tax assessed. The failure to pay the tax provided for in this section shall constitute sufficient cause for the revocation of any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-31. - Excise tax on distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  The city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131 does hereby levy an excess tax on the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink at the maximum percentage rate prescribed by state law of the charge made by the licensed dealer to the public for the beverage sold. The tax levied by this section shall not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(b)  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed retail dealer of distilled spirits by the drink. The tax shall be paid on or before the 10 th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city finance department containing such information as may be required by the city finance department in order to calculate the tax due. 
(c)  The failure to file the report or pay the tax shall subject licensed consumption dealer to a penalty comparable to that set out in subsection 3-30(c) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-32. - Excise tax on malt beverages. 
(a)  The city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(l) does hereby levy an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, which is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, at the maximum rate permitted by state law for local excise taxation on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons on a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(b)  The city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80(2) does hereby levy an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages, sold in bottles, cans and other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, at the maximum rate permitted by state law for local excise taxation per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(c)  The excise tax provided in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages, provided, however, that such taxes shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed brewer for malt beverages served or sold by the brewer directly to the public pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. The taxes shall be paid on or before the 10 th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the corporate city limits of the City of Kingsland by the wholesale dealer. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city finance department itemizing for the preceding calendar month, the exact quantities of malt beverage, by size and type of containers, sold during the month within the corporate city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 7-24-2017) 
Sec. 3-33. - Per liter tax on wine. 
There is hereby levied and imposed on the first sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax at the maximum amount prescribed by state law per liter or a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. The manner of imposition, payment and collection of this tax shall be the same as set out in section 3-30 of this chapter, dealing with distilled spirits and alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-34. - License application; use of licensed vehicle for delivery, etc. 
Any person, firm or corporation located in the City of Kingsland, Georgia, desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine, in the City of Kingsland shall make application to the city council for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing the forms authorized and prescribed by the council. No alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the City of Kingsland except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-35. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to fail in a timely manner to file any report required pursuant to this chapter or to fail to timely and properly remit all taxes due with any such report. Such licensee may be required to appear before the city council to show cause why such licensee's license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  Any licensee who fails in a timely manner to file any report required pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed a penalty and interest in the amount hereinafter provided: 
(1)  When any person required to file a report as provided by this chapter fails to file the report within the time prescribed he shall be assessed a penalty of $100.00 or ten percent of the tax due, whichever is greater, for each failure to file. 
(2)  In the event the finance director determines, upon inspection of the invoices, books, and records of a licensed dealer or from any other information obtained by him or his authorized agents, that the licensed dealer has not paid the proper tax or the proper amount of taxes, the dealer shall be assessed for the taxes due. After assessment, the person assessed shall be provided with notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided for in section 3-27 of this chapter. 
(3)  When any person willfully fails to pay any tax due as provided by this chapter, the person shall be assessed a penalty the same as that provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44. 
(4)  When any person willfully fails to file a return, files a false or fraudulent return, or when a tax deficiency or any part of a tax deficiency is due to a fraudulent intent to evade any tax imposed or authorized by this chapter, the person shall be assessed a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due. 
(5)  When any person fails to pay the tax or any part of the tax due as provided by this chapter, the person shall pay interest on the unpaid tax at the rate of one percent per month from the time the tax became due until paid or at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, whichever is greater. Interest shall be computed on a monthly basis for any portion of a month during which payment is delinquent. 
(6)  All penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall be payable to and collected by the finance director in the same manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-36. - Outdoor advertising. 
No outdoor advertising with respect to the promotion of the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine shall be permitted on the exterior of any wholesale or retail outlet or elsewhere in the City of Kingsland, Georgia, except as may be authorized by the laws of the state and regulations implemented by an agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 3-37. - Severability should any portion of ordinance be held invalid. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter are severable. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances for any reason be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or void, the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby to the extent that any remaining portion of the chapter may reasonably be given effect without the invalid or void portion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, 7-23-2007) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Keeping of livestock or fowl. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Fowl means any domesticated gallinaceous bird. 
(2)  Livestock means swine, sheep, goats, horses, cows and other livestock. 
(3)  Premises means a home, place of business, farm, garden or any other location owned, leased, rented or held by a person within the legal limits of the city. 
(b)  Keeping restricted. No person shall have, keep, house, feed or possess any livestock or fowl on any premises within the legal limits of the city, except as provided in section 118 of the land development ordinance. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be charged with such violation, upon complaint lodged by any citizen, and tried in mayor's court, and upon being found guilty shall be punished in accordance with provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1968, §§ 8-1201—8-1203; Ord. No. 2015-17, 6-22-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 4-2—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , adopted the Camden County Animal Control Ordinance, Chapter 14 of the Camden County Code of Ordinances, and the city entered into an agreement with the county for the provision of animal control services. Art. II has been substantially amended by Ord. No. 2015-17. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 4-26—4-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former §§ 4-26—4-30, in their entirety. Subject matter and legislative history of these repealed sections follows. 

 
Sec. 4-31. - Keeping wild animals. 
(a)  No person shall own, possess or have custody on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display, training or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to state, federally or ASPCA accredited facilities. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet. 
(c)  The police department shall have power to release or order the release of any infant wild animal under temporary restraint that is deemed capable of survival. 
(Ord. of 10-25-93, § 6) 
Sec. 4-32. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No person may sponsor, promote or train a wild animal to participate in, contribute to the involvement of a wild animal in, or attend as a spectator, any activity or event in which any wild animal engages in unnatural behavior, or is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically harassed, or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or stressed mentally or physically, or is induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner that will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. This prohibition applies to events and activities taking place either in public or private facilities or property, and applies regardless of the purpose of the event or activities and irrespective of whether or not a fee is charge to spectators. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Ord. of 10-25-93, § 7) 
Secs. 4-33—4-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former §§ 4-33—4-36, in their entirety. Subject matter and legislative history of these repealed sections follows. 

 
Secs. 4-37—4-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former Div. 2, §§ 4-41—4-4-50, in their entirety which pertained to dangerous dog control and derived from Ord. No. 2004-21, §§ I—X, adopted Dec. 13, 2004. 

Secs. 4-41—4-50. - Reserved, 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former Art. III, §§ 4-51—4-57, in its entirety which pertained to vicious dog control and derived from Ord. No. 2006-15, §§ I—VII, adopted July 10, 2006. 

Secs. 4-51—4-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted June 22, 2015 , repealed former Art. IV, §§ 4-91—4-96, in its entirety which pertained to rabies control and derived from Ord. No. 2007-23, §§ I—VI, adopted Dec. 10, 2007 

Secs. 4-91—4-96. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; mobile homes, Ch. 12; soil erosion and stormwater management, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 22; wells, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The city's building permit fees are included in it's schedule of fees and charges. An official copy is available for review and reference in the city clerk's office. Building permit fees were adopted pursuant to the following ordinances: 
1. Ord. No. 1984-5, 6-11-84; 
2. Ord. No. 1987-9; 
3. Ord. No. 1989-2, 2-13-89; 
4. Ord. No. 2003-22, 10-13-2003. 

Sec. 5-1. - Adoption of technical codes. 
The following codes and all subsequent revisions and appendixes and Georgia supplements and amendments are hereby adopted by reference as through copied in full in this section: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa code, 2012 Edition. 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition. 
(11)  NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 1991-7, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 2003-01, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2015-18, 12-14-2015 ) 
Cross reference— Plumbing, § 5-26 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; nuisances, Ch. 14; storm erosion and stormwater management, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 22; wells, Ch. 24. 
Sec. 5-2. - Finished floor elevation. 
(a)  All new construction finished floor elevation shall be no lower than 1.0 feet above the closest city maintained or future city maintained street elevation, at the discretion of the city engineer. This elevation shall be taken within 100 lineal feet in either direction of the construction site. The intent of this section is to create and open drainage stormwater swales in order to comply with the Camden County Master Drainage Study, dated February 1983. 
(b)  The finished floor elevation shall be indicated on a foundation plan and shall be sealed by a state licensed surveyor or engineer. No further construction can continue until the foundation plan has been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 7-12-93) 
Sec. 5-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-18, adopted Dec. 14, 2015 , repealed former § 5-3 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption of the 2003 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code and derived from Ord. No. 2006-13, §§ 1—3, adopted June 12, 2006. 
Secs. 5-4—5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Adoption of standard plumbing code, § 5-1(4); utilities, Ch. 22; wells, Ch. 24. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 5-26—5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLOW RESTRICTIONS ON FIXTURES 

Sec. 5-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-37. - Exemptions from division. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 5-40 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this division were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 5(a), (b)) 
Sec. 5-38. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any person violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 6(b)) 
Sec. 5-39. - Enforcement of division. 
This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 6(a)) 
Sec. 5-40. - Residential construction. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs: 
(1)  A gravity tank type, flushometer valve or flushometer tank that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  A shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 2) 
Sec. 5-41. - Commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 5-40(1) through (5). 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 3) 
Sec. 5-42. - Effective date. 
The requirements of section 5-40 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991 and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 1-14-91, § 4) 
ARTICLE III. - DEMOLITION 

Sec. 5-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Demolition means the wrecking, destroying and/or remove of a building. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 5-44. - Permitting. 
(a)  A demolition permit must be obtained from the planning and zoning department or his/her designated official prior to beginning the demolition of a structure. 
(b)  Permitting fees for demolishing a structure will be $200.00. If demolition begins prior to obtaining a permit, a penalty of $400.00 will be assessed. All condemned structures falling under sections 14-21, et seq. are exempt from this fee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 5-45. - Utility cut off. 
(a)  All utilities must be cut off prior to beginning demolition of a building. Locates must be performed by the respective entities to ensure that no underground infrastructure is cut. 
(b)  Water and sewer lines must be capped off at the property line to ensure there is no possibility of contamination of the respective lines. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 5-46. - Inspection. 
Prior to beginning demolition, the entity performing the demolition must contact the building inspector who will grant authorization to begin. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 5-47. - Removal requirements. 
(a)  The person who has secured a permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level. 
(b)  Any trees or foliage to be removed by the contractor on the property shall be approved by the planning and zoning director prior to removal. All trees designated for removal must be marked properly with yellow line in clear view. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 5-48. - Operation times. 
Operating times of demolition or construction shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2002-18, 12-23-2002) 
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; city council, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.; municipality may elect either to maintain its own registration or to provide for the city to use the county registration list, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125(d). 

Sec. 6-1. - Use of county registration list. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and establishes the practice, policy and use of the county elector registration list, which is to say that the official county elector registration list shall be the official city elector registration list for all city elections and public determinations. 
(b)  Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the board of registrars of the county shall be eligible to vote in a municipal primary or election authorized and conducted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, §§ 1, 2, 4-8-85) 
Sec. 6-2. - Limitation of partisan primaries. 
No political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal elections. 
State Law reference— Municipalities may provide that no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-95(b). 
Chapter 7 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; police, Ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); authority to provide ambulance and emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Incorporation of city civil defense organization in county organization. 
(a)  The city civil defense organization shall be incorporated in and become part of the county civil defense organization. 
(b)  The civil defense director, who shall be appointed by the mayor, shall be made a deputy director for the city and placed on the staff of the county civil defense organization. 
(Ord. of 2-21-80(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 7-2—7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POLICY 

Sec. 7-20. - Emergency management policy. 
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters resulting from manmade or natural causes; in order to ensure that preparations in Camden County (including the Cities of Kingsland, Woodbine, and St. Marys, if adopted by the Mayor and City Councils of the Cities of Kingsland, Woodbine, and St. Marys) will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters; generally to protect the public peace, health and safety; and to preserve the lives and property of the people of Camden County, it is found and declared necessary: 
(1)  To create an emergency management agency for emergency management in Camden County; 
(2)  To confer upon the Board of Commissioners of Camden County and the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners the emergency powers provided for in this article; 
(3)  To authorize the establishment of an emergency management agency and the taking of such steps as are reasonable and necessary to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-20, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-21. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Agency means the emergency management agency enacted by the Board of Commissioners of Camden County. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, disasters or imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action or similar physical conditions. These functions include without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
State of emergency means the conditions declared by chairman of the commissioners when after conferring with the Mayors of Kingsland, St. Marys and Woodbine, and in their judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extra ordinary action to prevent or alleviate the loss of human life or damage to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-21, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-22. - Enforcement. 
The law enforcement authorities of the State of Georgia; the Camden County Sheriff's Department; and the Cities of Kingsland, and St. Marys Police Department shall enforce the orders, rules and regulations issued pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article. During a declared state of emergency, the Camden County Sheriff and the Chiefs of Police in Kingsland and St. Marys, Georgia shall have the authority and power to increase the number of and swear in additional police officers during the declared state of emergency. Such officers' tenure shall expire at the conclusion of the state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-22, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-23. - Organization. 
(a)  There is hereby established pursuant to the provisions of this article an agency which shall be known as the "Camden County Emergency Management Agency", hereinafter called the "Emergency Management Agency" with a director of emergency management who shall be the head thereof. 
(b)  The Board of Commissioners of Camden County shall nominate a director of emergency management who shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. The director shall be subject to the direction and control of the board of commissioners, through the county manager and shall be responsible for the carrying out of the programs for emergency management in Camden County. The county manager shall act as the acting director of emergency management in the event of the absence or disability of the director for any reason. The compensation of the director shall be fixed by the board of commissioners and the director shall hold the office at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The director may employ such technical, clerical, stenographic and other personnel, may fix their compensation; and may make such expenditures with the appropriations therefore, or from other funds made available to him for the purpose of emergency management as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(d)  The director, subject to the direction and control of the board of commissioners, shall be responsible for carrying out the programs for emergency management in Camden County. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations called upon to assist in a state of emergency in Camden County, shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with the Emergency Management Agency of the State of Georgia and that of the federal government. 
(e)  The sheriff, the police chiefs and fire chiefs shall be the disaster coordinators and shall act for the chairman of the board of commissioners when requested to do so by the chairman of the board of commissioners or the vice-chairman in the chairman's absence. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-23, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-24. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  Prior to declaring any state of emergency within the geographical boundaries of Camden County, the chairman of the board of commissioners after advice and counsel with the other members of the Board, the Mayor of Kingsland, the Mayor of St. Marys, and the Mayor of Woodbine and with concurrence with the Georgia Emergency Management Agency shall be vested the sole authority to declare a state of emergency. 
(b)  A declaration of a state of emergency or disaster shall activate the emergency and disaster response and recovery aspects of the local emergency operation plans applicable to Camden County and shall be the authority for the deployment and use of force to which the plans apply and for the use or distribution or any supplies, equipment and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to provisions of this article. 
(c)  The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have and may exercise for such periods as the state of emergency or disaster exists or continues the following emergency powers: 
(1)  Command or utilize any private property if he finds this necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
(2)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or a part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within Camden County if he deems this action necessary for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation or response; 
(3)  Prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with the evacuation; 
(4)  Control ingress and egress to and from the disaster area and the occupancy of premises therein; 
(5)  Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives or combustibles; 
(6)  Make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing; 
(7)  Suspend any regulatory ordinance prescribing the procedure for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, order, rule, or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster; 
(8)  Utilize all available resources of Camden County as may be reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
(9)  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and duties as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the public; 
(10)  To ensure all laws, rules and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control of all civil forces and helpers in Camden County; and 
(11)  To seize or take for temporary use, property for the protection of the public. 
(d)  Any power or authority granted to the chairman of the board of commissioners by this article may be exercised by the vice-chairman of the board of commissioners so long as the chairman of the board of commissioners is absent from Camden County or otherwise unable to perform the duties of the office of the chairman. If the chairman and vice chairman of the board of commissioners are both absent from Camden County or otherwise unable to perform the duties of the office of chairman, any power or authority granted to the chairman of the board of commissioners by this article may be exercised by the member of the board of commissioners designed by the chairman of the commission. The chairman, during the committee appointments, shall designate a line of authority setting forth the order of succession of the commissioners for exercising the powers and duties until either the chairman or vice-chairman are able to exercise those powers and duties. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-24, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-25. - Regulations. 
(a)  The director of the agency is authorized and empowered to make orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary for emergency management purposes, provided such orders, rules and regulations are noninconsistent with any orders, rules or regulations promulgated by the Governor of the State of Georgia or by any state agency exercising power delegated to it by him. 
(b)  All such orders, rules and regulations shall be approved by the board of commissioners prior to their effective date and copy, as approved, shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  All such orders, rules and regulations promulgated by the board of commissioners shall have the full force and effect of law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-25, 4-11-2005) 
Sec. 7-26. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2-2-26, 4-11-2005) 
Chapter 8 - COMMUNITY RISK REDUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03, adopted May, 9, 2016 repealed Ch. 8, §§ 8-1, 8-50—8-54 and enacted a new Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-42 as set out herein. Former Ch. 8 pertained to fire prevention and protection and derived from Ord. No. 1994-8, adopted August 8, 1994; Ord No. 2003-25, adopted November 24, 2003; and Ord. No. 2000-03, adopted March 27, 2000. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Adoption of fire safety law. 
It is hereby adopted by the City of Kingsland for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion, smoke or related emergencies, those certain codes and standards adopted and amended by the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards of the State of Georgia 120-3-3, under authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 25-2-4, 25-2-12, and 50-13-21. There shall be not less than one copy of such codes and standards filed in the office of the fire marshal, and those codes and standards are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out completely in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 8-2. - Construction codes. 
All codes, ordinances, standards, and pamphlets adopted in this article and by the Rules and Regulations of the Fire Safety Commissioner, Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards, shall be construed as the standard for fire code compliance among buildings within the city and shall prevail in matters of life safety over all other local codes, ordinances, or standards which apply to the same building components or systems covered by this article, and shall be known as the fire code. Final approving authority for fire code compliance covered in this section shall be the community risk reduction division of Kingsland Fire Rescue, also known as the fire prevention section and the city fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-3. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the chief of the department, fire marshal or designee of Kingsland Fire Rescue. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-4. - Penalties for violation of the article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the codes or standards adopted by reference in this article or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to this article, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council within the time set forth in this article, shall constitute a violation of a city ordinance. Any person violating this article or any of the codes, standards, and/or laws incorporated in this article shall be deemed guilty of violating a city ordinance and shall be fined according to the following schedule: 
80 to 100 percent completion, annual and first follow-up: ..... No fine 
Second follow-up, the fine shall be: ..... $100.00 
Third follow-up and each subsequent follow-up, the fine shall be: ..... 150.00 
(1)  The application of the penalty in subsection (1) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(2)  Upon written notice from the fire marshal or his designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article and the codes or standards adopted in this article, or otherwise being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(3)  Permits or approvals may be revoked by fire plan review, or by the fire marshal, or his designee, when there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any materials or facts contained in plans or other information on which the permit or approval has been based. 
(4)  Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the fire department find conditions which are unsafe and/or in violation of the provisions or intent of the codes, standards, or ordinances enforced by the fire marshal's office, written notice may be given to the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant or occupant's representative requiring that any activities impacted by the conditions shall cease until the condition is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-5. - Establishment and duties of the community risk reduction division. 
(a)  The fire code shall be enforced through the fire protection and risk reduction division, by the chief of the department or his designee, and fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the fire protection and risk reduction division shall be appointed by the chief of the department. 
(c)  The chief of the department may detail such members of the fire services as inspectors and investigators as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the department may appoint technical inspectors, who may be selected in accordance with their certifications and experience. 
(d)  The chief of the department may detail such member of the fire services as deputy fire marshal. The deputy fire marshal works under the fire marshal and coordinates all the fire prevention and public educational programs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-6. - Limits on storage of explosives and blasting agents. 
Locations for the storage of explosives and blasting agents shall comply with the rules promulgated by the fire safety commissioner of the state, as they may be amended, entitled Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, chapter 120-3-10, "Rules and Regulations for Explosives and Blasting Agents." 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-7. - Limits on storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks. 
Permanent installations for the storage of flammable liquids in aboveground tanks shall comply with the city zoning ordinance, as amended, as well as rules promulgated by the safety fire commissioner of the state, as they may be amended, entitled Rules of the Safety Fire Commissioner, chapter 120-3-11, "Rules and Regulations for Flammable and Combustible Liquids." 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-8. - Limits on bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases. 
Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall comply with the city zoning ordinance, as amended, as well as rules promulgated by the safety fire commissioner of the state, as they may be amended, entitled Rules of the Safety Fire Commissioner, chapter 120-3-16, "Rules and Regulations for Liquefied Petroleum Gasses." 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-10. - Administrative variances. 
A committee comprised of the fire marshal, deputy fire marshal, building officials and public works director shall have the power to implement systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety as alternatives to those prescribed by the codes, provided technical documentation is submitted to the committee to demonstrate equivalency, and the system, method, or device is approved for the intended purpose. Variances granted shall be as nearly equivalent as practical to the codes and standards required in this chapter. The decision of the committee may be appealed to the fire chief, city manager and planning director jointly. Appealed decision reversal must be unanimous. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-12. - Appeals. 
Any appeal or request for a variance from the provisions of the codes set out in this article shall be submitted in writing to the fire marshal's office with the explanation and reason why the variance should be granted. In response thereto, the fire marshal's office shall furnish a statement as to the purpose of the requirement along with a response which approves or denies the request. Should the affected party wish to appeal the decision of the fire marshal, said appeal shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by planning and zoning or the fire department and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by this article, and fee schedule as may be amended, to be submitted to the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-13. - Standards for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for new construction, additions, and renovations on private property. 
Reference city municipal policies and specifications manual established by Ordinance 2008-23 as may be subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-14. - Location of hydrants and hydrant specifications. 
Reference city municipal policies and specifications manual established by Ordinance 2008-23 as may be subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-15. - Obstruction of approach or visibility of fire hydrants and connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, vegetation, or object, to obstruct the approach or visibility of any fire hydrant or fire department connection closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. A minimum three-foot clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-16. - Requirements pertaining to fire protection systems. 
(a)  Buildings shall be equipped with an approved standpipe system when required by the building or fire code. Required standpipes shall be installed in accordance with the building code, fire code, and NFPA 14, installation of standpipe and hose systems. 
(b)  Hotels, motels, dormitories, lodging or rooming houses, residential board and care facilities with four or more residents, multi-family residential occupancies, and health care facilities of combustible construction (Types III, IV, or V according to the International Building Code) shall have complete automatic fire sprinkler systems installed in accordance with appropriate NFPA standards. 
Exception: Hotels, motels, dormitories, lodging or rooming houses, residential board and care facilities, multi-family residential occupancies, and health care facilities of combustible construction with plans submitted prior to adoption of this section, must meet the sprinkler requirements adopted at the time plans were submitted. This exception does not apply when the structure is subsequently modified more than 50 percent. 
(c)  Hotels, motels, dormitories, lodging or rooming houses, residential board and care facilities with four or more residents, multi-family residential dwellings, educational occupancies, day-care occupancies, and health care facilities with three or more floor levels, regardless of type of construction shall have complete, automatic fire sprinkler systems installed in accordance with appropriate NFPA standards. 
Exception: Hotels, motels, dormitories, lodging or rooming houses, residential board and care facilities, multi-family residential dwellings, educational occupancies, day-care occupancies, and health care facilities with three or more floor levels, with plans submitted prior to adoption of this section, must meet the sprinkler requirements adopted at the time plans were submitted. This exception does not apply when the structure is subsequently modified more than 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-17. - Requirements for tenant separations and attic separation within multi-tenanted commercial, industrial, and non-residential buildings. 
Tenant separations shall have a minimum fire resistance rating of one hour. Fire barriers shall be continuous from outside wall to outside wall and from one fire barrier to another or a combination thereof, including continuity through all concealed spaces. Rated assemblies shall extend from the floor of the lowest level to the underside of a fire resistance rated floor/ceiling or roof assembly. All rated assemblies shall have been tested and listed by an approved, accredited testing laboratory or meet the requirements for prescriptive or calculated fire resistance rated assemblies in accordance with the International Building Code. All openings and/or penetrations within rated assemblies shall be tightly sealed using an approved, listed, detail or method complying with ASTM-E814 or UL 1479. 
Exception: Executive suites, flea markets, and similar sublets or subleases, complying with the requirements for non-separated use according to the International Building Code and meeting all of the following requirements: 
(1)  All tenants must be of the same general occupancy classification or meet the fire and building code requirements for the most restrictive and stringent occupancy classification represented. 
(2)  All tenants share amenities such as rest rooms, means of egress, break rooms, conference/class rooms, and office support. 
(3)  Buildings with tenant areas separated so as to allow the possibility of leasing to separate tenants with separate restrooms and means of egress shall not be granted the executive suite or sublet exception. 
(4)  Each tenant occupying spaces qualifying for the tenant separation exception may be required to have an individual certificate of occupancy at the discretion of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(5)  Attic draft-stopping shall be constructed of wood or metal studs with one layer of fire rated gypsum board on each side to divide combustible attic spaces into areas of 3,000 square feet or less. Access panels, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, shall be located leading into each area from the floor level immediately below the compartmentalized area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-18. - Requirements for tenant separations and attic separation within multi-family residential buildings. 
All tenant separations shall have a minimum fire resistance rating of one hour. All tenant separation walls shall extend from the floor of the lowest level to the underside of the roof deck, unless the top floor/ceiling assembly has a one-hour fire resistance rating in which event attic draft-stops shall be installed at 3,000 square foot intervals or at every other tenant line, whichever is less. Attic draft-stopping shall run with the roof trusses and be placed to create compartments covering no more than two units. 
All rated assemblies, both walls and floor/ceiling assemblies, shall have been tested and listed by an approved, accredited testing laboratory or meet the requirements for prescriptive or calculated fire resistance rated assemblies in accordance with the International Building Code. All openings and/or penetrations within rated assemblies shall be tightly sealed using an approved, listed, detail or method complying with ASTM-E814 or UL 1479. 
Attic areas shall be draft stopped at 3,000 square foot intervals or every other tenant line, whichever results in a smaller area. 
Access panels, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, shall be located leading into each area from the floor level immediately below the compartmentalized area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-19. - Accessibility for firefighting equipment and personnel. 
(a)  When access to or within a structure or project is unduly difficult because of secured openings, the owner and/or tenant shall be responsible for ensuring quick access into the area for fire services use. 
(b)  An all-weather fire apparatus access road, designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus, shall be provided to or around all buildings, to extend within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building. 
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimension of 150 feet where: 
(1)  The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the appropriate NFPA standards. 
(2)  A fire apparatus access road cannot be installed because of location on property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades, or similar conditions, and an approved, alternative means of fire protection is provided. 
(3)  Fire department access shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(4)  Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet and an un-obstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet six inches. 
(5)  Dead-end roadways more than 150 feet in length shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having a 50-foot radius at the outside curb line, or other approved means for turning around. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-20. - Submission of plans and specifications required. 
(a)  Owners, their agents, or designees of all buildings, tenant spaces, and commercial sites, covered by this article, are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to fire plan review, prior to obtaining the required fire permits. 
(b)  Permits must be obtained prior to construction, demolition, change of use or occupancy classification, tenant name change, or ownership change, in buildings, tenant spaces, or commercial sites and prior to addition, removal or changes of any fire protection system(s) therein. 
(c)  A final inspection and certificate of occupancy, for each business establishment, must be obtained from the fire marshal's office prior to occupying any building covered by this article or conducting business. 
(d)  Plans, specifications, and other required information must be submitted to fire plan review prior to obtaining the required temporary use permits for activities including, but not limited to, bon fires, commercial burning for land clearing, use of certain tents and canopies, and certain fireworks and pyrotechnic displays. A final inspection must be passed and permits activated prior to conducting permitable activities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-21. - Required plans and drawings. 
Construction documents shall be submitted in one or more sets with each permit application. Plans submitted shall be in accordance with state law, rules, and regulations. Construction documents shall be dimensioned, and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the fire official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of the fire code, and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the fire official. 
The seal of an appropriate registered design professional, architect, or engineer, in accordance with state laws, rules and regulations, with original signature currently licensed by the State of Georgia shall be affixed to the plans of the following projects: 
(1)  All places of assembly with a calculated occupant load of 100 or more persons using occupant load calculations as set forth in the NFPA Life Safety Code. 
(2)  All healthcare facilities as defined by NFPA 101, Life Safety Code. 
(3)  All penal and correctional institutions. 
(4)  All day-care centers with 12 or more clients. 
(5)  All educational facilities. 
(6)  All residential board and care facilities with an occupant load of seven or more persons and considered a "large facility" as set forth in the fire code. 
(7)  Any structure or tenant space with a "cumulative construction" area of 5,000 square feet or more or $100,000.00 in cost or three stories in height. 
(8)  Where required by state law. 
Exception: Unless required by state law, the fire official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional, if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that a review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the fire code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-22. - Revision of plans. 
(a)  All drawings, specifications and/or pertinent documents, required to bear the stamp, seal, and signature of a registered designer shall be revised by the designer of record and bear his/her stamp or seal and signature on all revisions and details. Required revisions to stamped plans are subject to the designer of record's approval, which shall be in the form of "hard-line" drawings. Fax transmittals, electronic submittals, or written correspondence may be deemed acceptable alternatives subject to the approval of the fire plan review supervisor, fire marshal, or deputy fire marshal, and/or building official. 
(b)  Certain minor corrections to plans, such as relocation of exit signs, sprinkler heads, smoke detectors or change of door swings, may be "redlined" as determined by each department. Redlined corrections shall be shown on all required sets of plans and/or specifications and shall bear the name and signature of the individual submitting the project for code compliance review. 
(c)  Examples of items not allowed to be "redlined" are as follows: 
(1)  Changes to the means of egress such as direction of travel, number of means of egress, egress widths, travel distance, and other egress components. 
(2)  Changes to the number of exits. 
(3)  Changes to features necessary for accessibility for the disabled. 
(4)  Changes to fire alarm systems except as stated in the above subsection. 
(5)  Changes to sprinkler systems to include site plans except as stated in the above subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-23. - Inspections required. 
(a)  The fire marshal, deputy fire marshal or his designee shall inspect or cause to be inspected, at various intervals all construction work pertaining to fire codes and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, site or facility prior to occupancy. 
(b)  Owners, or their agents or designees, of all buildings, tenant spaces, and/or commercial sites covered by this article are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to fire plan review prior to obtaining the necessary fire permits. 
(c)  An 80 percent completion inspection, a 100 percent final inspection, and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the fire marshal's office prior to the occupancy of the facility. Fifty percent inspections may be required to inspect methods of sealing penetrations, fire department access, and other provisions affiliated with larger projects. 
(d)  Upon a satisfactory final inspection of buildings, the necessary certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall be issued. Certificates of occupancy shall be displayed prominently in a public or common area of the building. 
(e)  Plans, specifications, and other required information must be submitted to fire plan review prior to obtaining the required temporary use permits for activities including, but not limited to, bon fires, commercial burning for land clearing, use of certain tents and canopies, and certain fireworks and pyrotechnic displays. A final inspection must be passed and permits activated prior to conducting permitted activities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-24. - Collection of fees and issuance of permits and approvals. 
All fees are payable to the City of Kingsland and collected at the city payment centers. All fees shall be collected for construction permits, certificates of occupancy, and other fire related permits, plan reviews, revisions, variances, certificates, and re-inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-25. - Governmental organization facilities exemptions. 
Fees in section 8-24 may be waived for projects that serve a governmental purpose in accordance with the city's permit fee waiver policy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-26. - Temporary occupancy. 
(a)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a facility. The fire marshal's office shall forward comments in writing to the building official of the City of Kingsland allowing or disallowing occupancy of a partially completed facility. 
(b)  All facilities described in this section shall be equipped with the following minimum features in order for a temporary certificate of occupancy to be issued: 
(1)  All required portions of the means of egress shall be complete. (Does not include floor or wall-covering). 
(2)  All exit signage shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(3)  All illumination of means of egress and emergency lighting fixtures shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(4)  All required exit components shall be installed and equipped with approved hardware. 
(5)  All automatic sprinkler systems (if so equipped) shall be installed, tested, and properly tagged by a certified licensed contractor of the State of Georgia. 
(6)  All fire barriers shall be installed and properly sealed. 
(7)  All required fire alarm and detection systems shall be installed, tested and properly tagged by a certified licensed contractor of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Any facility where a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued shall be in compliance with the above features. If necessary, certain portions of a facility may be issued a temporary certificate of occupancy as long as all the above criteria have been met. The fire marshal or his deputy and the building official conducting the inspection shall agree upon, and document, the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and the document shall bear the names and signatures of both parties granting the approval. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-27. - Persons allowed in the vicinity of a fire. 
No persons except firefighters, police officers, members of the governing body of the city, the owners of the subject property or their agents, and the agents of insuring companies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without their presence being requested by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire, medical, or related emergency, may be charged with violation of this section and, upon conviction thereof, be punished for said violation of O.C.G.A § 16-10-24.1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-28. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than those on official emergency business related to the call shall not follow closer than 500 feet any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire, medical call, alarm or any other emergency, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in response to an emergency or alarm. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be charged with a violation of this section and upon conviction thereof may be punished for violating the O.C.G.A § 40-6-49. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-29. - Grossing fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, roadway, or private driveway without the consent of the fire department official in command. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for a violation of this section and upon conviction thereof, be punished for the violation of County Ordinance 40-6-248. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-30. - Rules and regulations for outdoor and open burning. 
(a)  In this section, open burning means the disposal of combustible wastes by burning outside the confines of a building, incinerator, or container designed, equipped and functioning so as to reduce the production and dissemination of smoke or fumes to a level below that which would impair the health or comfort of the inhabitants of the city, and so as to prevent the emission of sparks. 
(1)  Combustible wastes shall include the combustible components of otherwise noncombustible items, such as automobile and truck bodies and shall include any ordinarily noncombustible material which is rendered combustible by the combining with it of highly combustible fuels. 
(2)  Open burning, without a permit, is prohibited and no person shall kindle or maintain any fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit or other proper authorization except as follows: 
Note: All required permits shall be obtained from the City of Kingsland. 
(b)  Recreation/cooking fire: No permit or fee required for recreational purposes such as cooking food for immediate human consumption, e.g., camp fires, barbecues, grills etc. 
(c)  Firefighter training fires: No permit or no fee required. Fires set for the purposes of training firefighting personnel should comply with the following: 
(1)  Any asbestos containing materials should be removed in accordance with the environmental protection division's regulations governing asbestos. Call (404) 363- 7032 for further information. 
(2)  Structures should be emptied of any materials in storage that may contain heavy oils, natural or synthetic rubber, furniture, appliances or solid waste. 
(3)  Weather conditions should be such that smoke and ashes will not linger in the area or the same do not blow into residential, shopping, educational or hospital areas. 
(4)  Residuals from the suppression and containment efforts are not allowed to run off into bodies of water, i.e., streams, ponds, swimming pools, etc. 
(5)  Training should be conducted no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and concluded by 4:00 p.m. (fall and winter), or 6:00 p.m. (spring and summer). 
(6)  The person in charge of any such firefighting training exercise should make a thorough investigation of the proposed evolution and the prevailing circumstances before commencing any such burning and continuously evaluate the evolution as needed. The person in charge of such firefighting training should obtain a release and consent to conduct such training from owner(s) of the property. 
(d)  Open flame-making equipment: For the operation of devices using open flames such as asphalt kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame-making equipment, no permit or no fee required. 
(e)  Bonfires: Permit required, no fee required. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private or public land unless the location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure, or the fire is contained in an approved waste burner located not less than 15 feet from any structure. Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply or other approved fire extinguishing equipment. 
Note: No flammable or combustible liquids shall be used to start this type of fire. Only paper, cardboard or kindling shall be used to start bonfires. 
(f)  Land clearing: Permit required, no fee required. The applicant shall complete the burning permit application issued by the city fire department. The applicant shall submit a plat or site plan showing the proposed location of the pit and information relating to the proximity of any occupied or unoccupied structure. Such permit shall be valid for the duration of the open burning but in any event shall not be valid beyond two months from the date of issue. 
(1)  Air curtain destructor: Pit fires are the only type of fires permitted for the purposes of land clearing. No aboveground fires are allowed in the city. All pit fires shall be operated in strict accordance with the "Air Curtain Destructor Operating Guide and Procedures" as published by the North Georgia Region Environmental Protection Division. Pit fires shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  The pit shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied or habitable structure or public road. Air curtain destructors used solely for utility line clearing or road clearing may be located at a lesser distance upon approval of the fire inspector. 
b.  Only wood wastes consisting of trees, logs, brush and stumps may be burned. Sawdust, other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood, or non-wood construction materials cannot be burned. 
c.  No more than one "air curtain destructor" can be operated within a ten-acre area at one time, or there must be at least 1,000 feet between any two air curtain destructors. The air curtain destructor must be under the control of a trained operator at all times during operation. 
d.  Air curtain destructors must be able to pass an even, non-turbulent flow of air across the top of the pit. Air curtain destructors with an air duct or manifold that has been altered by bends, dents, holes, etc., and are incapable of providing an even and non-turbulent flow of air across the top of the pit shall not be approved for use. 
e.  The air curtain destructor shall be operated in a manner to prevent air, land or water pollution, safety/health hazards or nuisances. 
f.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic-based or impregnated materials shall not be used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor. 
g.  No smoke emissions exceeding 40 percent opacity may be produced during operation except for a reasonable period during ignition and charging of the pit. 
h.  When the pit is cleaned of ash, airborne particulate is to be minimized by wetting or mixing the ashes with dirt. 
i.  Diesel fuel or kerosene may be used to start pit fires. 
j.  The city has established the following operating procedures for air curtain destructors, in addition to those stated herein, and upon issuance of a permit for operation of an air curtain destructor, a copy of such procedures will be provided to the permit holder. A copy of such procedures is attached to Ordinance No. 1994-8 as Exhibit "A." 
Note: The amount of dirt on or in the material being burned in such pit shall be minimized. 
(g)  Burning restrictions: 
(1)  The city may prohibit any and all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(2)  Burning shall be permitted on any given day of the year provided a permit has been issued by the City of Kingsland and/or the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(3)  No burning is permitted when prevailing winds are in the direction of populated areas. 
(4)  No burning is permitted when there is fog, rain, or cloud bases that are diffused or ill-defined or for at least one day following the passage of a cold front. 
(5)  No burning is permitted during an air pollution episode, such as an air pollution alert/warning/emergency declared by proper authorities. 
Note: An air pollution episode occurs when the air contaminant concentration in an area is great enough to cause danger to public health. 
(h)  Enforcement: The duly appointed fire inspectors of the city fire department are authorized to have all powers necessary to enforce this section, which includes the authority to issue or deny permits for open burning. 
(i)  Penalties: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined by the state. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. 
(1) First offense, written warning with: ..... No fine 
(2) Second offense, the fine shall be: ..... $100.00 
(3) Third time and each reoccurring offense, the fine shall be: ..... 150.00 
(j)  Extinguishing of open burning: The fire inspector and the personnel assigned to the city fire department shall have the authority to summarily extinguish any open burning which is in violation of any of the provisions of this section, and/or which constitutes an immediate threat to life and property. 
(k)  Appeals: Any person aggrieved by an order, determination or permit revocation by the fire inspector may in writing appeal such order, determination or permit revocation within three business days to the City of Kingsland at P.O. Box 250, Kingsland, Georgia, 31548. In no event however, shall a pit fire or other open burning continue after the fire inspector has revoked such permit. 
(l)  Validity: The mayor and city council hereby declares that should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section be for any reason held to be unconstitutional; such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(m)  Liability: Any officer charged with the enforcement of this section, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not hereby render themselves liable for any damages that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-31. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-32. - Burning of certain prohibited materials. 
No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases such as, but not limited to, nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere may be burned within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-33. - Obstructing a fire station. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block any access route or put any obstruction of any nature in front of any fire station or location where fire service equipment is located that would or may impede the movement or response of said fire service equipment. This is a violation and upon conviction punishable under O.C.G.A § 40-6-203. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-34. - False alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or false report for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-35. - Response to malfunctioning alarms. 
When emergency responses to a malfunctioning fire, medical, or similar alarm system, exceed two in a 12-month period, a fee shall be assessed for each additional incident. A fee of $50.00 will be assessed for the third incident in a 12-month period; and a fee of $100.00 will be assessed for each of the fourth through the sixth false alarms within that period. 
Fees shall be payable to City of Kingsland. Failure to pay false alarm fees shall constitute a violation of a city ordinance and be subject to penalties as set forth in this article. 
When emergency responses to a malfunctioning fire, medical, or similar alarm system, exceed six in a 12-month period, a citation will be issued and a minimum fine of $100.00, but not exceeding $1,000.00, shall be assessed per response. 
Exception: The provisions of this section will not apply to newly installed residential fire or medical alarms for a period of 90 days following installation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-36. - Fire extinguishing equipment installation in restaurants or other facilities having cooking equipment. 
(a)  Approved ventilation hoods and hood fire suppression equipment shall be installed in restaurants or other occupancies with food preparation facilities having cooking appliances capable of producing grease laden vapors, such as ranges, deep fat fryers, grills, broilers, or other similar appliances. 
(b)  The standards for approval of such facilities shall be based on the fire code including NFPA 96 ventilation control and fire suppression of commercial cooking operations or an equivalent measure deemed acceptable to the fire marshal or assistant fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-37. - Family day-care homes. 
Family day-care homes as defined by subsection (1) of this section shall meet all codes and standards applicable to day-care homes. 
(1)  Family day-care homes, for purposes of the fire code, shall be defined as a day-care home in which more than three, but fewer than seven, clients receive care, maintenance, and supervision by other than their relative(s) or legal guardian(s) for less than 24 hours per day, generally within a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Owners, their agents, or designees of all family day-care homes are required to submit plans and specifications and obtain the required fire permits prior to construction or renovation and, fire inspections, and a certificate of occupancy, prior to conducting business in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-38. - Designated fire lanes. 
(a)  Streets or drives adjacent to the following locations shall have designated fire lanes. 
(1)  Any building of 22,500 square feet or more with storage facilities, except for storage warehouse occupancies which are equal to or greater than 80 percent of the total building area and which comply with subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Place of assembly with occupant load of 300 or more. 
(3)  The area five feet on each side of fire hydrants, fire department connections, and associated appliances used for fire protection. 
(4)  All points of exit from nursing homes, hospitals, multi-storied office buildings and places of assembly. 
(b)  Buildings not required to have fire lanes, shall maintain fire service access according to applicable laws, ordinances, codes, and standards. 
(c)  Where designated fire lanes are required, they shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The curbing shall be painted traffic yellow. Where curbing is not present, there shall be designated a 20-foot-wide, cross hatched, traffic yellow way of access kept free of obstructions. 
(2)  Signs meeting the specifications described in this article shall be spaced no less than 30 feet apart and legible from both directions of travel. 
(3)  Specifications for fire lane signs shall be as indicated on the official "specifications for fire lane signs" document maintained at fire plan review and in the office of the fire marshal. No parking—fire lane signs must meet the specifications of and be installed according to the manual of uniform traffic and control devices (MUTCD). 
(d)  Building driveways shall be kept clear of any obstruction which would hinder access by fire services equipment 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-39. - Unlawful ignition of combustible materials. 
Any persons smoking or attempting to light or smoke a cigarette, cigar, pipe or tobacco in any form for which lighters, matches, flammable liquids or chemicals are used, and who sets fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house or household furnishings, in any hotel, rooming house or multi-family house, as a result of such smoking or attempting to smoke, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-40. - Reporting of fires. 
Any damage by fire having a total dollar value of $200.00 or more shall be reported to the fire department within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-41. - Fire watch. 
(a)  The fire marshal, or his designee, shall have the authority to require standby fire personnel or an approved fire watch when potentially hazardous conditions or a reduction in a life safety feature exist due to the type of performance, display, exhibit, occupancy, contest or activity, an impairment to a fire protection feature, or the number of persons present. 
(b)  The owner, agent, or lessee shall employ one or more qualified persons, as required and approved, to be on duty. 
(c)  The cost of standby fire personnel shall be at no cost to the fire department. 
(d)  Such standby fire personnel or fire watch personnel shall be subject to the orders of the fire marshal, or his designee, at all times and shall be identifiable and remain on duty during the times such places are open to the public, when such activity is being conducted, or while such impairment or condition remains, as required by the office of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Sec. 8-42. - Crowd managers. 
(a)  Crowd managers: Assembly occupancies having occupant loads of 100 or more shall be provided with a minimum of one trained crowd manager or crowd manager supervisor. Where the occupant load exceeds 250, additional trained crowd managers or crowd manager supervisors shall be provided at a ratio of 1:250, crowd manager/supervisor to occupants, respectively, unless otherwise permitted by the following: 
(1)  This requirement shall not apply to assembly occupancies used exclusively for religious worship with an occupant load not exceeding 2,000. 
(2)  With the exception of assembly occupancies noted above where alcoholic beverages are consumed, the ratio of trained crowd managers to occupants shall be permitted to be reduced where, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, the existence of an approved, supervised sprinkler system and the nature of the event warrant. 
(b)  Training. The crowd manager shall receive training approved by the fire code official in crowd management techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-9-2016) 
Chapter 9 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-26, adopted Dec. 8, 2008, amended the former Ch. 9, §§ 9-1—9-12, 9-31—9-35, 9-61—9-65, and enacted a new Ch. 9 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1991-6, art. 1, §§ A—D; art. 2; art. 3, §§ A—H; art. 4, §§ A—D; art. 5, §§ A—E, adopted Sept. 23, 1991; Ord. No. 2003-13, adopted May 12, 2003. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; emergency management, Ch. 7; mobile homes, Ch. 12; soil erosion and stormwater management, Ch. 17; solid waste management, Ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 9-1. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council, of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Kingsland, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Secs. 9-5—9-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-10. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-11. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 21, 2017 (i.e., most current FIRM map), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for Camden, dated December 21, 2017 (i.e., most current FIRM map of county), are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (*Specifically identify*) 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 105 South Lee Street, Kingsland, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-12. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-13. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-14. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-15. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-16. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-17. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as' is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Secs. 9-18, 9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 9-20. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The Kingsland planning department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-21. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the Kingsland planning department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 9-31(2) and 9-33(2); 
d.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 9-35(5); 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Kingsland planning department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-22. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Kingsland planning department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, and the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-11, then the Kingsland planning department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 9-21(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with sections 9-21(2) and 9-23(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Kingsland planning department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 9-21(1)(c) and section 9-31(2) or section 9-33(2). 
(8)  Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 9-35(5). 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Kingsland planning department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(13)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Kingsland planning department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(14)  If a portion of the structure is located in a SFHA, the entire structure shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(15)  If a structure is located in multiple flood zones and/or BFEs, the entire structure shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Secs. 9-23—9-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 9-30. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (Not applicable in coastal high hazard areas.) 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-31. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 9-30(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and the substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured housing, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation, (not applicable for coastal high hazard areas). The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 9-22(6). An operation and maintenance plan shall be prepared to assure the continued viability of flood proofing measures. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (reference section 9-30(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-11, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting analysis, technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if 9-33(4)a. above is satisfied, all new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-32. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-11, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  For subdivisions and developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as- built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(2)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 9-11, then the Kingsland planning department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article IV. Only if data is not available from these sources, the provisions of 9-32(2)(3) shall apply. 
(3)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest, floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than one foot above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 9-30(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than one foot above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The Kingsland planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-33. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-11, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 9-31. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-34. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-11, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to one foot above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one-foot above as high as the flood depth number specified (in feet) on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least one foot above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 9-30(4), "elevated buildings". 
The Kingsland planning department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction and the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified flood level in section 9-34 plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 9-21. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-35. - Coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-11, are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with 9-35(6) below; 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings, columns, or shear walls; and 
(4)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both (non-structural and structural). Water loading values shall equal or exceed those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the Georgia State adopted Standard Building Code. 
(5)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in 9-34(2)—(4). 
(6)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open wood lattice work or decorative, screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
a.  No solid walls shall be allowed; and 
b.  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or mesh screening only. 
c.  If aesthetic open wood lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
(7)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having open wood latticework or insect screening must be submitted to the Kingsland planning department for approval; 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with open wood latticework or decorative screening, as provided in this section. 
(9)  There shall be no fill used as structural support, or to elevate areas used for septic tank drain fields. Limited non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The Kingsland planning department may approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully evaluated: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(10)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage; 
(11)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of 9-31(3) are met. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-36. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Sec. 9-37. - Standard for critical facilities. 
(a)  No new critical facilities and substantial improved critical facilities shall be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(c)  Hazardous materials shall not be stored in the SFHA. The following materials are prohibited in the SFHA. Acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, prussic, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sodium and sulfur. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Secs. 9-38, 9-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 9-40. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Kingsland planning commission as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Kingsland planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Camden County. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the Kingsland planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to, destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Kingsland planning department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Kingsland planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018) 
Secs. 9-41—9-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 9-50. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 9-11. 
Base flood, means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means any portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See definition for structure. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, or piers adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during the base flood event. 
Existing construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 1, 1984, the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted for that community. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 1, 1984, the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge and culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 1,1984, the effective date of the initial FIRM and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 1, 1984, the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home nark or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 1, 1984, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2008-26, 12-8-2008; Ord. No. 2011-07, 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 2017-12, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 6-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-05 , 7-23-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Chapter 10 - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any right or franchise granted by the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(5); administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY 

Sec. 10-26. - Grant of privileges. 
The right is hereby granted to Atlanta Gas Light Company, and its successors and assigns, to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, and to use and occupy the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such right, when exercised as provided in this article, to continue for 30 years after the date of approval of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 1, 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-27. - Right of cancellation. 
The city reserves the right to cancel the franchise granted by this article if the grantee does not commence construction of its distribution system for the city within three years from the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 1(a), 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-28. - Rates. 
The grantee under this article shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it such rates as are prescribed by the public service commission or other lawful regulatory body of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 2, 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-29. - Payment to city. 
(a)  The grantee under this article hereby agrees and covenants, for and in consideration of the rights and privileges granted to it in this article, to pay within 60 days following the end of each quarterly period to the city three percent of the gas sales receipts received by the grantee from customers served under all rate schedules except for interruptible rate schedules or special contracts as defined and approved by the state public service commission, or any successor state regulatory group, within the territorial limits of the city during the preceding quarterly period. 
(b)  Should the city require the grantee to pay any license fee or tax, excise tax, indirect tax, occupation tax, franchise tax, privilege tax, regulation charge or related fees, taxes or charges, excepting ad valorem taxes and business license taxes for appliance sales, the aggregate amount of such fees, taxes and charges shall be deducted in full by the grantee from the quarterly payments subsequently accruing to the city. The quarterly periods for which such payments shall be made shall commence upon the first day of the month immediately following the acceptance and effectiveness of the franchise granted by this article. The mayor and council of the city, through its authorized representatives, shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of the grantee for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of gas as set forth in this section within the territorial limits. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, §§ 3, 3(a), 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-30. - Effect of article. 
All rights granted and authorized in this article shall be subject to and governed only by this article; provided, however, that the city expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights granted by this article not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 4, 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-31. - Restoration of streets. 
The grantee under this article, upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city for the purpose of laying, repairing or maintaining gas mains, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time and without cost to the city, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other places of the city, without cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 5, 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-32. - Indemnification of city. 
The grantee under this article shall save and keep harmless the city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person whomsoever, on account of negligence of the grantee in the installation, maintenance and repair of its mains and pipelines along the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in the city, provided the grantee shall have been notified in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity for defense. 
(Ord. No. 1985-29, § 6, 12-9-85) 
Sec. 10-33. - Franchise fee calculation. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Base year" means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
Secs. 10-34—10-50. - Reserved. 
(2)  "Base year franchise fee factor" means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day capacity as recorded by the company on the last day of the base year. 
(3)  "Design day capacity" means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (DT) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits of the city, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
(4)  "Firm customers" means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
(5)  "Fiscal year" means the 12 months ending September 30 of each year. 
(6)  "Inflation index" means the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the company. 
(b)  Franchise fee. The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the company to the city shall be calculated as follows: The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits. The following formula quantifies this payment: 
FFc = FFFby x (1+(CPI-PFA)) x DDCc 
Where FFc = total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year. 
FFFby = the base year franchise fee factor 
CPI-PFA = the inflation index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
DDCc = the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
FFFby = FFby/DDCby where 
FFby = the total franchise fees paid in the base year 
and DDCby = the design day capacity of the base year. 
(c)  Responsibility for payment of franchise fee. The company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise ordinance as modified by this section. In addition, the company shall report annually the names of all gas marketers for which company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the city. The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee, license fee, occupation tax or other payment for use of the rights-of-way by the company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
(d)  Quarterly payments. Effective for the fiscal year 1999 and for each fiscal year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the company shall remit to the city quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this section. The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
(e)  Annual return. The company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
(f)  Delay of inflation adjustment. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the company changes its rates. 
(g)  Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this section and the original franchise dated December 9, 1985, this section shall control. All terms, conditions and stipulations contained in such franchise ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1998-11, § 1, 7-13-98) 
ARTICLE III. - CABLE TELEVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-13, §§ 1—17, adopted Apr. 28, 2008, amended Art. III to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 10-51—10-54, pertained to cable television, and derived from Ord. No. 1987-18, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 8, 1987; Ord. No. 2008-10, §§ 1—17, adopted Apr. 14, 2008. 

Sec. 10-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known, and may be cited as the "City of Kingsland Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Cable television franchisee means a company which as been granted a cable television franchise to own and operate a cable system in the City of Kingsland. 
Cable television system means a system of coaxial cables, wave guides, or other conductors and equipment for the reception, amplification and distribution of television, radio or other signals to subscribing members of the public for a fee. 
City is the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
Council is the City Council of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
Company is the grantee of rights under this franchise. 
FCC is the Federal Communications Commission. 
Landlord means a person who owns, leases, controls, or manages a multiple-dwelling unit. 
Multiple-dwelling unit means a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units or a non-owner-occupied dwelling containing two units, but does not include a structure or group of structures having living or sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 2, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 2, 9-13-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-53. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the city to the company the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain a cable television system for the reception, amplification and distribution of video and/or audio signals to subscribing members of the public for a fee, for a period of 30 years from and after the effective date of this article with an option to renew the franchise for an additional 30 years. 
(b)  The company is hereby granted by the city the right and privilege to construct and maintain said cable television system in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the city. 
(c)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. 
(d)  In connection with the right and privilege herein granted, the council has examined and approved the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the company, as well as the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements, as part of a public proceeding affording due process. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 3, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-54. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(a)  The company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercises of police power of the city. 
(b)  The company agrees to comply with all valid local, state and federal regulations, including the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(c)  Any amendments or modifications of Section 76.31 of the Rules of the FCC shall be incorporated into this franchise within one year of the adoption of such modification or at the time of the renewal of this franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 4, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-55. - Indemnification. 
The company shall indemnify, protect and save the city harmless from and against any and all losses, costs or expenses resulting from damage to any property or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made under any workmen's compensation law, which arise out of or occur by reason of the exercise by the company of the rights granted in this franchise. The company shall carry insurance to protect itself and the city from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The insurance policy shall specifically provide that the city shall be named insured. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall be not less than $50,000.00 as to anyone claim and not less than $200,000.00 aggregate in any single policy year; and against liability due to bodily injury or to death of person, not less than $100,000.00 as to anyone person, and not less than $300,000.00 as to all such claims arising from anyone accident. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it and the city from any and all claims under the workmen's compensation laws in effect that may be applicable to the company. All insurance required by this section shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of this franchise. The policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 5, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-56. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The company shall initiate construction of its cable system within one year after it has received a certificate of compliance from the FCC, and it shall thereafter equitably and reasonably extend the system so as to enable it to render service to all feasible areas within the city within five years after it has received a certificate of compliance from the FCC. Company shall apply for the said certificate within 90 days from the enactment of this article. 
(b)  With regard to the company's construction, operation and maintenance of this cable television system, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  The construction, maintenance and use of the company's cable television system shall comply with the standards for materials and engineering and all other provisions of the National Electric Safety Code and the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to supervise all construction and installation work performed subject to the provisions of this article and to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with governing ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 6, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-57. - Street vacation or abandonment. 
In the event any street, alley, public highway or utility easement, or any portion thereof, used by the company shall be vacated by the city or the use thereof discontinued by the company during the term of this franchise, the company shall forthwith remove its facilities there from unless specifically permitted to leave them there, and upon the removal thereof, restore, repair or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred in such condition as may be required by the city. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of the company, after 30 days' notice by city council to repair, improve or maintain such street proportions, the city may do such work or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the city shall be paid by the company, and collection may be by court action or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 7, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-58. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of all streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed to as good condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for a period of three years. 
(c)  Relocation. In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or width of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other system fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. The company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The company shall be given not less than 120 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(e)  Trimming of trees. The company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging any street, alley or other public way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its wires, cables or other equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 8, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-59. - Pole use. 
(a)  The company shall, whenever possible and practicable, use the poles owned and maintained by the city and/or the utility company(ies) which serve the city. When the use of such poles is not practicable or satisfactory and rental agreements cannot be entered into with said parties, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system. 
(b)  In all sections of the city where the cables, wires, or other like facilities of public utilities are presently placed underground or are required to be so placed underground at any time in the future, the company shall place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the company to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 9, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-60. - Employment practices. 
The company will establish and adhere to the following policies and procedures: 
(1)  Equal opportunity in employment shall be afforded all qualified persons by the company and no person shall be discriminated against because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. 
(2)  An equal opportunity notice will be posted in the office of the company which states as follows: "Equal Opportunity Employer - discrimination because of sex, race, color, religion, or national origin is prohibited and you may notify the Equal Opportunity Commission or the Federal Communications Commission if you believe you have been discriminated against." 
(3)  The policy set forth in subsection (2) above will be set forth on the employment application forms of the company in red ink. 
(4)  Those in positions to hire will be specifically instructed to examine all hiring policies to make certain that the same comply with the foregoing declarations. 
(5)  Each employee of the company will be advised of the foregoing equal opportunity policy. 
(6)  No selection techniques or tests that may have the effect of discriminating against minority groups or females will be used. 
(7)  Whenever recruiting is done through schools, schools with significant minority group enrollments will be given equal consideration. 
(8)  Contact with leadership in minority and human relations organizations will be maintained to encourage referral of qualified minority and/or female applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 10, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-61. - Reserved channel. 
The company shall reserve one channel for use by public and parochial elementary, secondary, and college level schools. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 11, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-62. - Regulation. 
(a)  The company shall, while operating under this franchise, maintain efficient cable television service in the city. However, the company shall not be liable for loss or damage caused by interruption or failure of service due to accident or breakdown to lines or equipment, strike, riot, act of God, or the public enemy, or such other causes as are beyond its control, or due to shutdowns for reasonable periods to make repairs to equipment; but the company shall in such cases exercise proper diligence in repairing such equipment and resume operation of same without unnecessary delay. 
(b)  The company shall adopt, and the council shall approve, procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints regarding its cable television operations. Notice of the procedures for reporting and resolving complaints shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable television system operated by the company. Further, the company shall have a business office or agent for the purpose of receiving notice of, investigating and seeing that proper steps are taken to affect the resolution of any problems relating to service or other aspects of its cable television operations. The local company representative shall have primary responsibility for the continuing administration of this franchise, and for the implementation of the procedures of this subsection. 
(c)  The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the company's plans, contracts, and engineering, accounting, financial, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the operation of the company and to all other records required to be kept hereunder. 
(d)  A copy of any and all rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by the company for the conduct of its business shall be filed with the city clerk; and a copy shall also be available for public inspection at the office of the company. 
(e)  This franchise shall not in any way be construed as a license or permit to the company to engage in the sale or service of radio or television sets or equipment. As part of the consideration for the granting of this franchise, the company shall not engage in the sale or service of TV sets appliances or parts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 12, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-63. - Rates. 
The rates or charges which the company assesses it subscribers for cable television services shall be at all times fair and reasonable. A copy of the company's schedule of charges for installation and furnishing of service shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such charges. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 13, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-64. - Payment to the city. 
(a)  The company shall pay to the city, for and in consideration of the right and privilege to conduct cable television operations pursuant to this franchise, an annual fee in an amount equal to three percent of its gross revenues (as defined in Section 36-6-2(8) of the Code of Georgia as it existed on the date of this amendment) derived from its cable service (as defined in Section 36-6-2(3) of the Code of Georgia as it existed on the date of this amendment), with each year's fee due and payable to the city clerk of the city by January 31 for the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  In the event of revocation or termination of this franchise, the final annual fee payment shall be prorated from the immediately preceding January 1 to the date of termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 14, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-65. - Assignment, transfer, lease or merger. 
This franchise shall not be assigned without the prior approval of the council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 15, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-66. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)  The city may declare a forfeiture of this franchise and revoke the same in the event the company: 
(1)  Substantially violates any provision of this article, where such violation remains uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent to the receipt by the company of a written notice of such violation, except where such violation is not the fault of the company or is due to excusable neglect; or 
(2)  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(b)  Such forfeiture shall be declared by an ordinance of the council duly adopted after 20 days' notice to the company, and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under this franchise or any provision of law; provided, however, that before the franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this section, except for nonpayment of monies due to the city from company, the company shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the council upon ten days' written notice to the company of the time and place of the public hearing; provided that said notice shall affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to constitute a cause for revocation; and provided further that notice of said public hearing shall be published in the local newspaper of general circulation at least five days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 16, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-67. - Miscellaneous. 
Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or conditions of this article shall not constitute a general waiver or relinquishment of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 17, 4-28-2008) 
Sec. 10-68. - Landlord and tenant rights. 
(a)  Installation to be permitted. 
(1)  Findings. Access to local originated programming and other cable and high speed internet services is an important benefit for all residents of the City of Kingsland, and arbitrary denial of access to tenants by a landlord is contrary to the public interest. 
(2)  Landlord to permit installation. A landlord may not prohibit or otherwise prevent a cable TV franchisee from entering a multiple-dwelling unit for the purpose of constructing, installing, or servicing cable system equipment if a tenant or occupant of the unit has requested cable service. A franchisee may not make an installation in an individual dwelling unit unless permission has been given by the tenant occupying the unit. 
(3)  Nondiscrimination in rent. A landlord may not discriminate in rental or other charges based on cable TV service subscription. The owner of the real property may require compensation in exchange for permitting the installation of cable system equipment within and on the real property only in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b). 
(4)  Franchisee obligations to landlord. A landlord may require a franchisee to install cable system equipment in the multiple-dwelling unit at no cost to the landlord and indemnify the landlord for any damage that results from the installation or removal of cable system equipment. 
(5)  Sanctions for violation. A landlord's violation of this section constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of an owner's multiple-dwelling operating license. 
(b)  Compensation. 
(1)  Compensation in excess of $1.00. If a landlord intends to require the payment of more than $1.00 per individual dwelling unit to allow the installation of cable system facilities or equipment, the landlord shall serve written notice on the franchisee within 20 days of the date the landlord is notified that a franchisee intends to construct or install facilities or equipment in the landlord's multiple dwelling. Unless timely notice is given by the landlord to the franchisee, it is conclusively presumed that the landlord does not claim or intend to require the payment of a sum in excess of a one-time payment of $1.00 in exchange and as compensation for permitting the installation of cable system facilities or equipment. 
(2)  Reasonable compensation. A landlord who has given timely notice to a franchisee may assert a claim for reasonable compensation in excess of $1.00 for permitting the installation of cable system facilities or equipment. Within 30 days after the landlord gives notice of intent to demand additional compensation, the landlord shall advise the franchisee in writing of the amount claimed as reasonable compensation. A landlord cannot assert a claim for compensation if the cable system cables, electronics, or equipment was installed at the multiple dwelling unit as of the enactment date of this section. 
(3)  Action to enforce claim of compensation. If within 60 days after the receipt of the landlord's claim a franchisee has not agreed to pay the amount claimed or some other amount acceptable to the landlord, the landlord may file an action in court to enforce the claim for compensation. In any such action, it shall be presumed that reasonable compensation is $1.00, but the presumption may be rebutted and overcome by evidence that: 
a.  The landlord has a specific alternative use for the space occupied by the cable system facilities or equipment, the loss of which results in a monetary loss to the landlord; or 
b.  Installation of cable system facilities or equipment in the multiple-dwelling unit will otherwise substantially interfere with the use and occupancy of the unit to an extent that causes a decrease in the resale or rental value of the real property. 
(4)  Determination of damages. In determining damages when no part of the real property is being taken, consideration shall be given only to an injury that is special and peculiar to the real property. The amount of any benefit to the real property by reason of the installation of cable system facilities or equipment shall be deducted from the damages awarded. 
(5)  Limitations on compensation. The landlord is not entitled to compensation based on a claim of lost profits or business opportunity from an existing or proposed satellite, microwave, or master antenna television system servicing the multiple-dwelling unit. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Franchisee rights. The right of a franchisee to construct, install, or maintain its cable facilities or equipment in a multiple-dwelling unit may not be delayed or impaired by: 
a.  The giving of the notice described in subsection (b); 
b.  The assertion of a specific claim by a landlord; or 
c.  The initiation by a landlord of legal action to enforce a claim. 
(2)  Unauthorized interference by landlord. If a landlord interferes with a franchisee's installation of cable facilities or equipment in a manner not authorized by this title, a tenant or occupant or the franchisee may seek a court order to enjoin the landlord from further interference. 
(Ord. No. 2010-08, § 19, 9-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-08, § 19, adopted Sept. 13, 2010 adopted provisions for landlord and tenant rights. At the city's instruction these provisions have been placed into § 10-68. 
Secs. 10-69—10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CAMDEN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY 

Sec. 10-71. - Grant of privileges. 
The right, privilege and franchise is hereby granted to Camden Telephone and Telegraph Company, Inc., referred to in this article as the telephone company, and its successors or assigns, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this article, to construct, erect, build, equip, own, maintain and operate in, along, under, over and across the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the city any and all such appliances, structures and fixtures necessary or convenient for rendering telephone and other communications service and for conducting a communications business, including the rendition of local and long distance telephone service. The appliances, structures and fixtures of the telephone company in the city shall remain as constructed on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, subject to such changes, under the limitations and conditions prescribed in this article, as may be considered necessary by the city in the exercise of its lawful powers and by the telephone company in the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 1, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-72. - Location of poles and conduit. 
The telephone company shall have the right to determine the number and location of poles, wires, cables, conduits, markers and other property and appliances to be placed in, over, upon, under and across the streets, avenues, alleys and other public places of the city, so long as such poles, wires, cables, conduits, markers, property and appliances do not interfere with or obstruct the normal flow of traffic or otherwise impede the common uses of the streets, avenues, alleys and other public places of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 2, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-73. - Restoration of streets. 
The surface of any street, alley, highway or public place disturbed by the telephone company in building, constructing, renewing or maintaining its plant and system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work, and maintained to the satisfaction of the city or of any city official to whom such duties may be delegated, for one year from the date the surface of the street, alley, highway or public place is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the city. No street, alley, highway or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 3, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-74. - Operation and maintenance of telephone plant. 
The telephone company shall maintain its system in reasonable operating condition at all normal times during the continuance of the agreement authorized by this article. An exception to this condition is automatically in effect when service furnished by the telephone company is interrupted, impaired or prevented by fires, strikes, riots or other occurrences beyond the control of the telephone company, or by storms, floods or other casualties, in any of which cases the telephone company shall do all things reasonably within its power to do to restore normal service. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 4, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-75. - Temporary removal of wires. 
The telephone company, on the request of any person, shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefited party, and the telephone company may require such payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 5, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-76. - Tree trimming. 
The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the telephone company, and its successors and assigns, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the telephone company, and, when so ordered by the city, such trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city, or of any city official to whom the duties may be delegated. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 6, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-77. - Payment to city. 
(a)  To indemnify the city for any and all possible damages to its streets, alleys and public grounds which may result from the placing and maintenance therein or thereon of the telephone company's poles, conduits or other equipment or apparatus, and to compensate the city for its superintendence of the agreement authorized by this article, and as the cash consideration for such agreement, the telephone company agrees to pay to the city monthly during the continuance of the agreement a sum of money equal to three percent of the annual gross receipts for the preceding year received by the telephone company from the rendition of local exchange telephone transmission service within the corporate limits of the city. The first payment under this section shall be made February 20, 1979, and shall be equal in amount to three percent of the gross receipts received from the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and thereafter payment shall be made monthly on the 20th of each month. 
(b)  The city agrees that the consideration set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be paid and received in lieu of any tax, license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or any other character of charge for use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city; in lieu of any pole tax or inspection fee tax; in lieu of any easement or franchise tax, whether levied as an ad valorem, special or other character of tax; and in lieu of any imposition other than the usual general or special ad valorem property taxes levied. Should the city not have the legal power to agree that the payment of such cash consideration shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals and easement or franchise taxes, then the city agrees that it will apply so much of the payment as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the telephone company's obligations, licenses, charges, fees, rentals and easement or franchise taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, §§ 7, 8, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-78. - Term. 
The agreement authorized by this article shall be in force and effect for a full term and period of 30 years from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 9, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-79. - Privileges not exclusive. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as giving to the telephone company any exclusive privilege. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 10, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 10-80. - Applicability of article to successors and assigns. 
The rights, powers, limitations, duties and restrictions provided for in this article shall inure to and be binding upon the parties to the agreement authorized by this article and upon their respective successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 1978-7, § 11, 10-10-78) 
Secs. 10-81—10-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GEORGIA POWER COMPANY 

Sec. 10-96. - Grant of privileges. 
The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to the Georgia Power Company, or its successors, lessees and assigns, for a period of 99 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the city as from time to time the Georgia Power Company, or its successors, lessees and assigns, may deem proper or necessary for the erection and maintenance of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, insulators, transformers and all appliances or connections for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as may be necessary for the extension, operation, repair and renewal of such facilities or any portion thereof, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. of 3-3-65, § 1) 
Sec. 10-97. - Payment to city; conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents contained in this article are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The Georgia Power Company, or its successors and assigns, shall pay into the treasury of the city on or before March 1st of each year, beginning with the year 1966, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules, as prescribed by the state public service commission, within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding calendar year, so long as the city itself shall not engage in any such competing utility business; and on condition that, if the city shall grant to any other corporation the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this article, including the payment of a license, privilege or occupation tax in an amount at least equal to that specified in this section. 
(2)  The payment of the percentage of gross sales provided for in this section shall be in lieu of all occupation, license, excise and special franchise taxes, and payment in full of all money demands and charges, except ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances; and whatever amount, if any, shall at any time be required or exacted for the benefit of the city on any of such accounts or on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage provided for in this section. 
(3)  Should the city itself ever at any time construct, purchase, lease, acquire, own, hold, use or operate an electric lighting or power plant or distribution system, then the payment of the percentage of gross sales provided in this section to be paid by the Georgia Power Company, or its successors and assigns, shall abate, cease and be no longer due, and shall forever thereafter be uncollectible. 
(4)  The work of erecting poles and all other work upon the streets and public places of the city shall be done under the supervision of the mayor and council or other legally constituted governing body of the city, and all sidewalks or street pavements or street surfaces which may be displaced by reason of such work shall be properly replaced and relaid by the Georgia Power Company, or its successors, lessees and assigns, to the satisfaction of the mayor and council or other legally constituted governing body of the city. 
(5)  The Georgia Power Company, and its successors and assigns, shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the erection or maintenance of poles, wires or other works, or condition of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable or on account of which judgment may be rendered against the city. 
(6)  The Georgia Power Company, and its successors, lessees and assigns, shall further, in constructing and maintaining its system of overhead lines, poles, wires and other structures, submit and be subject to all reasonable police laws, rules and regulations of the city for the regulation or control of such structures. 
(Ord. of 3-3-65, § II) 
Sec. 10-98. - Filing of acceptance. 
The Georgia Power Company, or its successors, lessees or assigns, shall, within 90 days from the approval of the ordinance from which this article is derived, file its written acceptance of the ordinance with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-3-65, § III) 
Sec. 10-99. - Additional terms and conditions. 
In addition to the terms and conditions set forth in the 1965 Ordinance, the company's occupancy and use of the streets, alleys, and public places of the city as authorized in the 1965 Ordinance are subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  For purposes of paragraph (2) of this section 1, the term "distribution facilities" means poles, lines, wires, cables, conductors, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus installed by or on behalf of the company (whether before or after the adoption of this ordinance amending franchise) in the streets, alleys, or public places of the city for the purpose of distributing electricity within the present and future limits of the city. Distribution facilities do not include any of the following: 
(i)  Electric transmission lines with a design operating voltage of 46 kilovolts or greater (hereafter referred to as "transmission lines"); 
(ii)  Poles, towers, frames, or other supporting structures for transmission lines (hereafter referred to as "transmission structures"); 
(iii)  Transmission lines and related wires, cables, conductors, insulators, or other apparatus attached to transmission structures; 
(iv)  Lines, wires, cables, or conductors installed in concrete-encased ductwork; or, 
(v)  Network underground facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city or any other entity acting on behalf of the city requests or demands that the company relocate any distribution facilities from their then-current locations within the streets, alleys, and public places of the city in connection with a public project or improvement, then the company shall relocate, at its expense, the distribution facilities affected by such project or improvement. The company's obligation under this paragraph (2) shall apply without regard to whether the company has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such distribution facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to the city under the provisions of the 1965 Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph (2), the company shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: 
(i)  Distribution facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; 
(ii)  Distribution facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widening, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); 
(iii)  Streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or 
(iv)  Distribution facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
(3)  The city and the company recognize that both parties benefit from economic development within the city. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) within the city, the city and the company shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the city and the company shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in the city's five-year capital improvement plan, the city's short-term work program, or the city's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of the company's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to, 
(i)  Both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or a local utilities coordinating council (or any successor organization) and 
(ii)  Both parties' use of the national joint utility notification system (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
(4)  With regard to each streetscape project undertaken by or on behalf of the city, the city shall pay the company in advance for the company's estimated cost to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) in connection with such project. For each streetscape project, the company shall estimate in good faith the amount of incremental base revenue, if any, that the company will realize as a result of new customer load or expansion of existing customer load attributable to such project; and such estimate shall be based on tariffs in effect at the time that construction of such project begins and shall not include fuel recovery charges, nonelectric service billings, or taxes. If such estimate indicates that the company will realize incremental base revenue, the company shall do one of the following, whichever results in greater cost savings to the city: 
(i)  Reduce the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs by ten percent; or 
(ii)  Where the city has developed a bona fide marketing plan within twelve months after construction of such project begins, either refund the amount of the company's incremental base revenue during such 12-month period to the city or credit such amount against any future payment due from the city to the company. The city and the company acknowledge and agree that the amount of any refund or credit calculated pursuant to clause (ii) of the foregoing sentence of this paragraph (4) shall not exceed the amount of the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs associated with such project. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 10-100. - Restriction. 
That nothing contained in this section amending franchise shall limit or restrict the right of customers within the corporate limits of the city to select an electric supplier as may hereafter be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § I, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 10-101. - Written acceptance. 
That the company shall, within 90 days from the approval of this section amending franchise, file the company's written acceptance of the same with the clerk of the city, so as to form an amendment to the franchise between the company and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § III, 7-11-2005) 
Sec. 10-102. - Conflict—Agreement acceptance. 
That upon such acceptance all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the company and the city with respect to the company's occupancy and use of the city's streets, alleys, and public places, in actual conflict herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § IV, 7-11-2005) 
Secs. 10-103—10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OKEFENOKE RURAL ELECTRIC MEMBERSHIP CORPORATION 

Sec. 10-121. - Grant of privileges. 
The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Okefenoke Rural Electric Membership Corporation, or its successors, lessees and assigns, referred to in this article as "Okefenoke," for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the city as from time to time Okefenoke may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as it may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary in the judgment of Okefenoke to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. of 8-14-89, § I) 
Sec. 10-122. - Payment to city; conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents contained in this article are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Okefenoke shall pay into the treasury of the city: 
a.  On or before March 1, 1990, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the period September 1 to December 31, 1989; and 
b.  On or before March 1 of each year thereafter during the term of the franchise a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year, on condition that, if the city shall grant to any other entity the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this article, including the payment provisions of this section. 
(2)  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage of gross sales provided for in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Okefenoke shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
(4)  Okefenoke shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall require Okefenoke to surrender or limit its property rights created by this article without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
(Ord. of 8-14-89, § II) 
Sec. 10-123. - Filing of acceptance. 
Okefenoke shall, within 90 days from the approval of the ordinance from which this article is derived, file its written acceptance of the ordinance with the clerk of the city, so as to form a contract between the parties. 
(Ord. of 8-14-89, § III) 
Sec. 10-124. - Repealer. 
Upon acceptance by Okefenoke of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the parties, in conflict with this article, shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated. 
(Ord. of 8-14-89, § IV) 
Chapter 11 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-17, § I, adopted June 30, 2003, repealed the former Art. I, § 11-1, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to door to door sales and derived from Ord. of Nov. 11, 1972. 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchants Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Chief of law enforcement refers to that chief officer of law enforcement, or his or her designee, as the case may be, who is charged with protecting and serving the public's safety in the jurisdiction, including the activities hereby covered. 
Community planning and development director or office of the community planning and development director refers to that local governmental position whose official capacity oversees regulation and licensure of the activities hereby covered. 
Registrant or registered solicitor means any person who is subject to this article who has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the office of the community planning and development director of the jurisdiction. 
Residence means any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any person as a dwelling. 
Soliciting means any of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the sale or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought; 
(2)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to publications, or publications; 
(3)  Seeking to obtain donations of anything of value for the benefit of any association, organization, corporation or program; 
(4)  Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services. 
Solicitor means a person engaged in the activities defined by this article as soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § II, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-2. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Registration. All natural persons desiring to engage in soliciting at the residences in the city or with the police jurisdiction thereof shall apply to the community planning and development director, at a cost of $150.00, for an annual certificate of registration. As an alternative, the natural persons desiring to engage in solicitations at residences in the city may apply for a 30 day temporary license at a cost of $50.00. The certificate, executed by the community planning and development director or his designee, shall be maintained by the community planning and development director, and a legible copy shall be provided to and carried by the registrant at all times while soliciting. Upon request for inspection by an occupant of a residence or a police officer while the registered solicitor is transacting his or her business or seeking to transact his or her business at any residence, the registrant shall show his or her registration certificate. 
(b)  Application for certificate. The city shall provide a standard form for use for registration of solicitors. The applicant for the certificate shall state upon his or her oath or affirmation that the information is truthfully provided to the best of his or her knowledge and belief. The applicant shall supply upon the form the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's true, correct, and legal name, including the name and address of any entity by which applicant may be employed in sales or for whose benefit application will be soliciting donations. 
(2)  Address of applicant's permanent home and address of any temporary local residence. 
(3)  The purpose for which soliciting will be done. 
(4)  A brief description of the method of presentation that will be made (such as presentation of samples and taking of written orders). 
(5)  The dates for when soliciting is planned. 
(6)  Whether a permit, license, or certificate of registration in connection with soliciting has ever been revoked, explaining the circumstances. 
(c)  Nonendorsement. In addition, the applicant shall certify on the application form that if his or her registration is granted, he or she will not state, imply, or represent to any person that the issuance of the certificate is an endorsement by the city nor any of its agencies or departments of the product, service or solicitor. 
(d)  Proof of identification required. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of one of the following: 
(1)  A valid drivers license of any state if applicant possesses such and intends to operate a motor vehicle in the jurisdiction, or 
(2)  A valid United States Uniform Service Identification, or 
(3)  A valid passport, or 
(4)  A valid identification issued by any agency of a state for the purpose of identification of the holder. 
(e)  Registration complete with issuance. Registration shall be complete when the community planning and development director issues the certificate of registration, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, said period not to exceed three days. 
(f)  Form of certificate. Each certificate shall be numbered, shall list the name of the individual solicitor and of any organization on whose behalf he or she is authorized to solicit (including self if an independent contractor), the date on which the certificate expires, and shall be dated and signed by the community planning and development director or the community planning and development director's designee. 
(g)  Maintenance of registry. The office of the community planning and development director shall maintain for public inspection a record of every application received and acted upon, together with any information pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration issued, and all denials of applications. Each application shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and each certificate issued shall be assigned a number exclusive to the registrant. Every certificate renewed shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was initially issued. The community planning and development director shall furnish to the chief of law enforcement of the jurisdiction a listing of all certificates issued and renewed and the chief of law enforcement shall maintain such listing for public inspection and for identification. 
(h)  Renewal. Annual certificates shall be valid for the calendar year in which they were issued and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of such year. Any certificate in good standing may be renewed upon request of the registrant and upon payment of $150.00. A temporary license may also be renewed every 30 days upon request of the registrant and upon payment of $50.00. The applicant shall be required to fill out a renewal application providing the information required in the initial registration. 
(i)  Nontransferablility. Certificates of registration shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and the firm, corporation or association on whose behalf he or she is authorized to solicit (self if an independent contractor). Certificates shall be nontransferable from individual to individual, from individual to firm, from firm to firm, and from firm to individual. It shall be a violation for a solicitor whose certificate authorizes soliciting on behalf of a firm named in the certificate to solicit on behalf of any other firm, organization, or association or for any purpose other than that specified on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § III, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-3. - Exemptions from registration. 
The registration provisions of this article do not apply to: 
(1)  Persons making solicitations solely for a church, religious organization or charitable organization, including any unincorporated association or corporation under the supervision and control of any church, charitable organization or religious organization, if the church or organization is tax-exempt under the provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code; provided, however, that any person who seeks to solicit a charitable contribution shall first file with the chief of law enforcement of the jurisdiction a notice describing the charitable purpose, signed by at least two officers or authorized representatives of the charitable organization. 
(2)  Students soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs, provided that the solicitation and its purpose have been approved by the principal, president or chief administrator of the students' school and said approval has been filed in writing with the chief of law enforcement of the jurisdiction. 
(3)  Persons canvassing for the purpose of distributing political literature or materials on behalf of a political party, candidate or public issue or introducing themselves as supported of a candidate, political party, cause or issue provided, however, the persons so exempted from registration as described above will nonetheless remain subject to all other laws and ordinances of the jurisdiction including without limitation the rights of property owners and consumers. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § IV, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-4. - Soliciting through placement of boxes. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to solicit charitable contributions by placing a receptacle for donations in any public place without first filing a notice of intent with the chief of law enforcement of the jurisdiction. Each person soliciting must in all other respects comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § V, 6-30-2003) 
Sec 11-5. - Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited. 
(a)  No solicitor or canvasser shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting. 
(b)  No solicitor shall represent, directly or by implication, that the jurisdiction or any other governmental entity endorses the solicitation or that the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement of the solicitor's product or service or of the individual solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § VI, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-6. - Registration disqualifiers. 
No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony within the ten years next preceding the date of application or has been convicted of any sex offense or who advocates or commits seditious action against the United States of America or any of its governmental subdivisions including this jurisdiction. All individuals soliciting within the city shall have a background check performed by the city police department for a fee of $15.00. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § VII, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-7. - Revocation of certificate. 
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder may be revoked by the chief of law enforcement if the registrant is convicted of a violation of this article, subject to any appeal of the conviction reversing any such conviction. Notice of revocation shall be immediately given to the registrant by personal service or by certified mail to the address listed on the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void and shall remain so unless the revocation is ordered rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § VIII, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-8. - Appeal from decisions of chief of law enforcement. 
Any applicant whose registration is not timely issued by the community planning and development director or any registrant whose certificate is revoked by the chief of law enforcement shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the governing body of the jurisdiction for a hearing and reconsideration. Any appeal must be demanded in writing sent by certified mail to the chief executive officer of the jurisdiction, with a copy filed with the office of the community planning and development director of the jurisdiction within seven calendar days of the effective date of the decision giving rise to the appeal. The notice of appeal will describe in detail sufficient to provide the governing body with notice of the action complained of and the grounds of appeal. The right of appeal to the governing body is not in derogation of any other rights in law or equity the applicant might have. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § IX, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-9. - Residential "No Soliciting" notice. 
(a)  Any adult owner or tenant of a residence desiring to secure protection under this article shall give notice of his or her desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a clearly visible weatherproof placard no smaller than 32 square inches stating in bold black letters against a white background, "No Soliciting" which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door of the individual's dwelling. 
(b)  The display of the placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to invite solicitors. If a solicitor does attempt to contact the owner or tenant of a residence desiring secure protection under this article the registered solicitor's license shall be revoked and reapplication shall not be permitted for one year from the date of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § X, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-10. - Time of day restrictions on soliciting. 
It is a violation of this article for any person, whether registered or not, to solicit any person at his or her residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. local time, Monday thru Saturday, unless the solicitor has an appointment to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § XI, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-11. - Penalty for nonregistration or violation. 
Any person who engages in soliciting, without complying with the registration requirements of this article, or who otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this article, is chargeable with a violation and shall, on conviction, be fined not more than $250.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-17, § XII, 6-30-2003) 
Sec. 11-12. - Termination for cessation of business. 
Any business license holder who ceases operation for a period exceeding 90 days shall have that license terminated without prejudice. The city may waive termination if it has received written notice of cessation of operations for reasons such as renovation, rebuilding, or relocation; if cessation was due to official actions against the business for which the business was subsequently found innocent; or if cessation was due to circumstances beyond the control of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, Art. 1, 6-11-2012) 
Secs. 11-13—11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-1997, adopted Jan. 13, 1997, amended this article in its entirety, in effect repealing former Art. II, §§ 11-26—11-39, occupation taxes, administrative fees and regulatory fees, and enacting new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. 1994-10, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 1994, as amended by Ord. No. 1995-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 1995. 
State Law reference— Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, G. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-26. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1997 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a fixed business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no fixed business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the community development director or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-27. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Kingsland is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Kingsland, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Kingsland, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, which is the major and principal source of income of such business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(3)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
(6)  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location or office shall include any structure, space, or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner or a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied by a local government on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes all nonprofit organizations. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-28. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $44.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, annual renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee levied in this article is an exercise of the police power of the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
Beer, wine, liquor by the drink* ..... $1,500.00 
Beer and wine by the drink* ..... 1,000.00 
Retail beer and wine* ..... 1,000.00 
*The above fees will be prorated for new businesses who are a license on or after July 1 of any year. The license will be considered a half-year license and the fee will be one-half of the amount shown above. 
Boxing and wrestling promoters ..... 550.00 
Burglar alarm installers ..... 110.00 
Carnivals ..... 110.00 
Contractors ..... 55.00 
Escort services ..... 3,000.00 
Firearms dealers ..... 110.00 
Firearms ranges/shooting galleries ..... 110.00 
Food service establishments ..... 110.00 
Fortune tellers ..... 110.00 
Handwriting analysts ..... 110.00 
Hypnotist ..... 2,500.00 
Insurance companies ..... 55.00 
Massage parlors ..... 3,000.00 
Modeling agencies ..... 3,000.00 
Nursing/personal care ..... 110.00 
Pawnbrokers/secondhand dealer ..... 300.00 
Peddlers ..... 55.00 
Tattoo artists ..... 550.00 
Taxi/limo operators ..... 55.00 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-19, § 1, 12-27-99; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 9-24-2001; Ord. No. 2003-02, 1-13-2003) 
Sec. 11-29. - Occupation tax levied; occupation tax structure; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the community development department: 
Number of Employees 

 
(c)  Restrictions on imposition of occupation tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside of the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(3)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the number of employees engaged in substantial efforts in the state. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 11-30. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia; exemption for tax paid in other state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner of a profession with no location or office in the state shall be exempt from assessment of an occupation tax under this article if such business or practitioner submits proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state on the business's or practitioner's sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-31. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-32. - Lines of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the community development department and that line of business being noted by the community development department upon the occupational tax certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-33. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-34. - Professionals classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set froth in section 11-29 of this article. 
(2)  A fee of $110.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 9-24-2001) 
Sec. 11-35. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-36. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 through 48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-37. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1997 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to penalties and interest for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Kingsland in 1997 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a percentage penalty imposed. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-04, § 1, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 11-38. - Allocation of employee tax of business with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses with multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the per employee tax can be allocated to each location, the number of employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each city location. 
(b)  For those businesses with multiple locations inside and outside of the city and where taxation is levied by a criteria other than per employee tax in the other local governments, the city shall not levy taxes on more than the allotted share of per employee tax for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-39. - Exemption on grounds that business is a nonprofit organization. 
Any nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the levy of occupation tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-40. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-41. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory requirement shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-42. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person intending to commence business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-43. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided, There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 1 of each year, and on January 1 each year hereafter. Every person intending to commence business in the city after January 1 shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 11-44 of this article. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the community development director, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that require registration without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-44. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment is due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax and/or regulatory fee due. 
(b)  Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned not exceeding six months, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-45. - Community development director; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The community development department and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1997 and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-46. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-47. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-48. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the said city, at the office of the finance director, on January 1 of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-04, § 2, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 11-49. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-50. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Tax registration to be revoked upon the following grounds: 
(1)  For failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(2)  For failure to pay any other moneys due the city. Upon the failure of any business or business owner to pay any other moneys assessed it by the city before such assessment becomes delinquent, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes and hotel/motel taxes, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article shall be revoked until all such moneys due the city are paid in full. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any assessments due the city by the owner of such business is due and unpaid at that time. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent assessments. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 1, 8-27-2001) 
Sec. 11-51. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied the community development director, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the community development director or duly designated officer of the city upon the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the community development director against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-52. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-53. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any and all parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed that provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that impose fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or for failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-54. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the community development director and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the community development director, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-55. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-56. - Requirement of public hearing before adoption, amendment or repeal of article and when revenues derived from occupation tax increase. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting, amending, or repealing any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. In addition, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing to determine how to use the additional revenue derived from occupation taxes in any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue derived from such taxes for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-57. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in or credit against occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 11-58. - Conflict between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1-1997, 1-13-97) 
Secs. 11-59—11-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 11-101. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses generally known as and defined herein as adult entertainment establishments. To that end this article has been enacted in the interests of: 
(1)  Promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; and 
(2)  Preserving the quality of life in residential and business areas of the city; and 
(3)  Promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of residential and commercial property values. 
This article is intended to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments and businesses in order to serve the legitimate governmental interests set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 1, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-102. - Legislative findings of fact. 
Based upon the results of an investigation and the attendant evidence produced, this council finds that: 
(1)  The outright prohibition of adult entertainment establishments improperly infringes upon protected forms of expression; but that reasonable regulation of such businesses so as to curtail and prevent pernicious secondary effects is both permissible and desirable. 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments and businesses, if unregulated, are likely to lead to an increase in illegal sexual activities, drug and alcohol offenses, disorderly conduct and other criminal activity. 
(3)  Law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment establishments and businesses are extremely limited due to the growth of the city and the county and such resources are best conserved by regulating and licensing adult entertainment establishments. 
(4)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents of the city require that adult entertainment businesses and establishments and their locations, operations, employees and owners be regulated and licensed in order to reduce the potential for harm and in order to preserve and protect the quality of life in the residential and business environs of the city. 
(5)  The location of adult entertainment establishments and businesses in close proximity to each other adversely affects the property values, causes an increase in crime, and encourages residents and other businesses in proximity to such adult entertainment establishments to move and locate elsewhere. 
(6)  There is presently in North Florida, and particularly in the Jacksonville area, and in Southeast Georgia an increasing trend toward nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment, and toward the utilization of nude and semi-nude employees engaged in other service-oriented activities and by adult entertainment establishments. 
(7)  The commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity consists of the use of nude and semi-nude entertainment in connection with or for the sale of goods or services, and the receipt of money by the person engaged in nude or semi-nude entertainment in exchange for or as consideration for a nude or semi-nude performance by such individual. Competitive commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity is adverse to the public's interest in quality of life and commerce and the total community environment in the city and surrounding areas. 
(8)  The commercial exploitation of nude and semi-nude conduct, acts, exhibitions and entertainment frequently occurs in commercial establishments either selling or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(9)  There is a direct relationship between the consumption of alcoholic beverages concurrently with nude and semi-nude activities, conduct and entertainment and an increase in criminal activities, disturbances of the peace and good order of the city and the concurrence of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. 
(10)  The combination of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude entertainment is inimical and adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life and commerce and quality of the environment of the city. 
(11)  It is the duty and responsibility of the mayor and council for the city to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents, the stability of value and use of property within the city, and the character of its neighborhoods and developments. 
(12)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, it is necessary and advisable to prohibit nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment in commercial establishments at which alcoholic beverages are available, sold, or consumed. 
(13)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, therefore, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, contractors, entertainers, performers, patrons, spectators, clientele and persons on the premises of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 2, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-103. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Adult entertainment establishment. The premises on which the following defined establishments operate or on which the following defined activities occur shall constitute adult entertainment establishments: 
(1)  Adult business. (i) Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (ii) any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. Any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, and computer compatible storage and service or any other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret. Any place where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises which features, uses, employs, or displays topless dancers, bottomless dancers or nude dancers; go-go dancers; exotic dancers; strippers; or similar entertainers or dancers. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel. A business which rents lodging rooms to the public for the purpose of engaging in conduct or entertainment defined in subsection (1) above. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(6)  Adult mini-motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(7)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(8)  Adult video store. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions and computer compatible storage and service media or any other media, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  Erotic dance establishment. A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by the displaying or exposing of, or an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(10)  Escort bureaus; introduction services. Any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(11)  Lingerie modeling studio. A business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(12)  Massage parlor/bathhouse. Any establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime or crime involving moral turpitude in the past five years. 
Licensed day care center. A day care center licensed by the state and/or local government that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
Minor. Any person under 21 years of age. 
Operator. The manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner(s). If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least five percent of the outstanding shares. 
Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
School. A public or private facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playground, stadiums, or other structure. 
Specified anatomical areas. Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities. Means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 3, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-104. - Adult entertainment establishment regulations. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the following regulations concerning their operation, to wit: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and from 8:00 a.m. Saturday through 12:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled substance upon its premises. 
(3)  All adult entertainment establishments shall conspicuously display the permit required by this article. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment for any purpose or reason. 
(5)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(6)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be located within an industrial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 4, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2000-12, § 1, 9-25-2000) 
Sec. 11-105. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
In addition to the regulations set forth in the preceding section 11-104, erotic dance entertainment shall be subject to and shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment license or permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  No later than the first day of February of each year an erotic dance establishment shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment permits shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose, which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(6)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(7)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(8)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(9)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(10)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(11)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 5, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-106. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, any specified anatomical area in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 6, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-107. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 7, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-108. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 8, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-109. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, escort bureau or adult business or erotic dance establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or permit, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 9, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-110. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than 21 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of 21 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A current, valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Georgia Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is 21 years of age or older; or 
(3)  A current, valid military identification certifying that such person is 21 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 10, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-111. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult bathhouse or massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 11, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-112. - Location; building and signage restrictions. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, licensed day care facility, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than one acre of land containing at least 400 feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way. 
(b)  A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 100 square feet of gross building area, or for every three customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Signage for such establishments shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 25 square feet of copy area (total of all sides), and one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground to highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setback shall be ten feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Buildings and structures operated and maintained in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any property line. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the property lines. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 12, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-113. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as city clerk requires, including but not limited to, date of birth, social security number, current address, current telephone and pager numbers, two color photographs of the prospective employee at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months, and a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $500.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license or permit. Violation of the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 13, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-114. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $2,500.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 14, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-115. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  If a person, acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  If a person, the applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  If a person, two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions and the disposition of such violation; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence addresses and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of the county superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of the subsection pertinent to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms of an individual applicant under this section, but only one application fee shall be charged. If the applicant is a Georgia corporation, it shall attach to the application certified copy of its articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto and its most recent annual report. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, it shall attach a certified copy of its certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments and its most recent annual report. If the applicant does or proposes to do business under a trade name, it shall attach a copy of the recorded trade name registration document to the application; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including the date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license or permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or any crime or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(17)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(19)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(20)  An interior floor plan drawing showing the location of all interior walls and/or partitions, stages, platforms and/or dance floors. 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official; 
(22)  The written consent of the registered agent as required by section 11-136 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 15, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-116. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city hall of the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 16, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-117. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officer or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other governmental entity located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with requirements contained in section 11-112 and with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards as evidenced by inspection reports prepared by city building official and state fire marshal's representatives; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the proposed premises complies with the distance requirements and limitations contained in section 11-112 of this article and is not located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site of any other business restricted hereunder; 
(10)  That the grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States; 
(11)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 17, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-118. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
(a)  No permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50,81. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 18, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-119. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 19, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-120. - Same—Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 20, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-121. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 21, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-122. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified in its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the planning director. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the City Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 22, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-123. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment permit or license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city clerk seeks to suspend or revoke a permit, the city clerk shall give written notification to the permittee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation(s). 
(b)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke a permit in the event of any of the following: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process; 
(2)  A permittee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrence(s); 
(3)  A permittee violated or knowingly allowed violation of any provision of this adult entertainment article, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violation(s); 
(4)  A permittee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime and/or a crime involving moral turpitude by the state or the city regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; 
(5)  A permittee failed to pay any fee, application/permit fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other ordinance of the city; 
(6)  A permittee has, after the date of the original application and floor plan approval, made interior floor plan alterations, without first obtaining approval, and such alterations involve the addition of private viewing rooms, cubicles, booths or similar areas. 
(c)  In the event that the city clerk determines that a permit violation has occurred, such permit shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation, the permit shall be suspended for 60 days. For a third violation and all subsequent violation(s), the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. Any permit that has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period, shall be revoked. In addition, any permittee found to be in violation of subsections 11-104(1), (2) and (4) of this article shall be subject to immediate permit revocation. Provided however, that permittee shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with section 11-125 hereafter. No permittee or any other applicant may apply for a permit for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of permit suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the permittee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the effective date of written notice received by permittee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city attorney may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the permittee upon appeal to the mayor and city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and city council, such meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 23, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-124. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and city council, such meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 24, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-125. - Same—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to mail written notice of hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume the responsibility for the mailing of notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 25, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-126. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 26, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-127. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 27, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-128. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 28, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-129. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 29, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-130. - Same—Action by council. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon the review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 30, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-131. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 31, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-132. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of permit granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 32, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-133. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 33, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-134. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The permittee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city building official. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 34, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-135. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city building official on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city building official shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not corrected, the city building official may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of the use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city building official. The city building official shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 35, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-136. - Abatement as a sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any pert thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 36, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-137. - Notices, registered agent, jurisdiction. 
(a)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the permittee, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of the county. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he or she is a resident of the county. The permittee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk as part of the permit application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the terms of this article, the permittee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of this article, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in the county. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any office, division, department or other agency under this article to any permittee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: (1) personal delivery; or (2) by certified United States mail addressed to permittee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or any notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 37, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-138. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. 
(b)  The county health department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(c)  The city/county fire department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments located within the city to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(d)  The city building official or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the city and county. 
(e)  The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violation to the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 38, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 11-139. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-1997, § 39(a), 4-14-97) 
Secs. 11-140—11-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKER ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-16, adopted July 28, 2003, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 11-201—11-210, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to pawnbroker and secondhand dealer establishments and derived from Ord. No. 2003-03, adopted Jan. 13, 2003. 

Sec. 11-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses generally known as and defined herein as pawnbroker establishments. To that end this article has been enacted in the interests of: 
(1)  Promoting the protection of the citizens of the city and surrounding areas; 
(2)  Promoting the protection of the pawnbroker when receiving a pledged or secondhand good; 
(3)  Promoting the integrity of the pawnbroker, his/her employees, the pawnshop, and the pawned or pledgee; and 
(4)  Ensuring fair dealings between all entities. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-202. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Pawnshop. Any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(2)  Pawnshop transaction. Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase or pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledgor or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
(3)  Pawnbroker. Any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this article. 
(4)  Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
(5)  Pledged goods. A tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this article section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include [choices] in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
(6)  Secondhand goods. Personal property previously owned or used which is purchased, consigned, or pawned as used property. Such secondhand goods shall include, but are not limited to; watches, diamonds, gems, and other precious stones; fishing rods, reels, and tackle; audio and video electronic equipment, including television sets, compact disc players, radios, amplifiers, receivers, turntables, tape recorders, videotape recorders, speakers and citizen band radios, computer equipment, radar detectors, depth finders, trolling motors, outboard motors, sterling silver flatware and serving pieces, photographic equipment, including cameras, video and film cameras, lenses, electronic flashes, tripods, and developing equipment; microwave ovens; animal fur coats; marine equipment; video games and cartridges; power lawn and landscape equipment; office equipment such as copiers, fax machines, and postage machines; furniture, sports equipment; golf clubs; weapons, including knives, swords, and air guns; telephones, including cellular and portable; firearms; tools; calculators; musical instruments, such as pianos and organs; lawn mowers; bicycles; typewriters; motor vehicles; gold, silver, platinum, and other precious metals including coins; and jewelry. 
(7)  Employee. 
a.  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his or her duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or 
b.  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker dealer; or 
c.  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-203. - Application. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses issued under the terms of this article shall make a verified application for the issuance of the license on a form to be prescribed by the council. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  The names, home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment of all persons owning a property interest in the establishment for which the license is sought. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten percent or more of the common or preferred stock in the corporation. 
(3)  The name, home address and home telephone number of the person who will be employed by the owner or owners as manager in the place of business for which the license is sought. Thereafter, if any person other than the person listed in the application becomes an owner or manager, the name, address and telephone number of the new owner or new manager shall be filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the date of such employment or ownership change. 
(4)  A copy of the alcohol, tobacco and firearms (ATF) license where applicable. 
(b)  All persons before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn shall first file an application with the city for an annual permit to conduct such business. The issuance of such permit will be based on a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. The cost of the permit/criminal history background investigation shall be $250.00, or a fee established by the city council. This fee is for the purpose of covering the investigative expenses and/or administrative costs associated with issuing an initial permit for all owners. In the event an owner has more than one pawnshop, then each location will be required to pay the investigative fee. This fee is nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued a permit and/or an occupational tax certificate. Owners are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee established by the city council. 
(c)  The following occupation tax certificate qualifications shall also apply: 
(1)  No occupation tax certificate required by this article shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this article shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a domesticate corporation lawfully registered and doing business under the laws of the State of Georgia, or any foreign corporation lawfully registered under the laws of the State of Georgia to do business in this state, the applicant may be permitted to apply for such license in the name of the corporation as registered in the office of the secretary of state. The applicant shall provide the licensing officer with the name of its agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of this state and also provide the licensing officer with the address of its registered office. 
(3)  An occupation tax certificate for a pawnbroker may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or has been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any pawnshop occupation tax certificate, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the business, have been convicted or have plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or have been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices. Should any applicant, partner, or officer engaged in operating a pawnshop, after a certificate has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or enter a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felony, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, the certificate and/or permit shall be immediately revoked or canceled. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-204. - Exemptions. 
Pawnshops in existence and operating prior to January 1, 2003 shall not be required to undergo the initial background investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-205. - Weekly report to police; required format. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report to be turned in weekly, in such form as may be acceptable to the chief of police, of all transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at the close of business on the date of the report. All reports shall be made available for pick up by police department personnel by 10:00 a.m. every Tuesday. In the event that Tuesday falls on a holiday pick up will be the next city business day. 
(1)  Such daily reports should be computer generated or in other such written form as may be acceptable to the chief of police. 
(2)  Daily reports shall list all property the pawnbroker pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, lent, given away or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, gender, height, weight, and date of birth of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued photographic identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon. 
(4)  The pledgee or seller shall sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell or pledge the goods. Copies of all pledge verification forms shall be submitted with the daily reports. 
(5)  The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, government issued photograph identification card such as a driver's license number or military identification card, date of birth, of any person purchasing or receiving property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(6)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain daily log reports on premises to be available for inspection by any duly authorized law enforcement officer during ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(7)  Pawnshops not submitting such weekly reports in a timely manner shall be subject to the following fines: 
a.  First offense ..... $100.00 
b.  Second offense ..... 250.00 
(c)  Third offense ..... 500.00 
(d)  More than three offenses within a six month period shall result in the revocation of the pawnshops business license. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-206. - Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract, or if purchase was made from a wholesale supply house or manufacturer authorized to do business in the state. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or purchased shall be held and maintained by the pawnbroker on the premises of the pawnshop or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside the city. 
(c)  The police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated by the police department or other law enforcement agencies as evidence. 
(d)  Any pawnbroker who fails to hold any property for 30 days or removes the property from premises without the chief of police's permission, or if the property is subject to a police investigation, is not immediately turned over to police upon request, may have its business license revoked after a due process hearing before the mayor and city council upon a finding that the pawn broker has violated the provisions of this section of the article. In case of an emergency involving alleged ongoing criminal activity, the license may be suspended for a period of 30 days by chief of police if necessary to protect the public from the alleged criminal activity. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-207. - Access to records and property. 
Any pawnbroker and any clerk, agent, or employee of such pawnbroker who: 
(1)  Fails to make an entry of any material matter in his permanent record book; 
(2)  Make any false entry therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from his place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the State of Georgia, Camden County, City of Kingsland or a federal officer to inspect his permanent record book or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for at least four years; 
(6)  Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 18 years or who the pawnbroker knows or has reason to believe is not the true owner of such property; 
(7)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller or waiving any of the provisions of this part or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction; or 
(8)  Fail to return or replace pledged goods to a pledgor or seller upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency, shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-208. - Same—Nontransferable. 
Pawnshop license or occupation tax certificate may not be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-209. - Locations and zoning. 
Pawnbroker establishments in the city shall be located only in zoning districts designated as C-2 and C-3. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Sec. 11-210. - Conflict between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2003-16, 7-28-2003) 
Secs. 11-211—11-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC SPACES AND FACILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-05, adopted Apr. 26, 2004, did not specify manner of codification hence; inclusion of these provisions as Art. V, §§ 11-241—11-245 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Offenses against public peace; § 15-26, et seq.; offenses against property, § 15-71, et seq. 

Sec. 11-241. - Use of public spaces and facilities. 
There shall be no demonstrative, informative, celebratory, or other forms of public expression, either fixed or processional, conducted on, over, upon, or burdening the public property of the city, or employing the facilities thereon, without first being permitted by the city after application made according to the requirements set out hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, 4-26-2004) 
Sec. 11-242. - Application. 
Within no less than 20 days prior to an event, the person or persons associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wish to conduct such event shall apply to the city for a permit, such application shall at a minimum include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is an association of persons in fact or in law, the application shall contain a description of the entity; the name of said entity, if names; the registered or recognized address of the entity, if any; the name of the person making application on behalf of said entity; such person's relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
(2)  A plan for review by the city, which plan will include: 
• The anticipated number of persons participating in the event; 
• The date or dates of the event; 
• The hours of each day the event, or, if the event is processional or mobile, the route of the event; 
• Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed; 
• Whether artificial lighting will be employed; 
• Whether temporary static structures will be constructed or employed, whether vehicles will be employed, and if so, a description of same sufficient to permit the city to evaluate the permitting factors set out hereinafter; 
• A description of provisions necessary to the safety and welfare of the participants in the event and members of the public in the area where the event will be conducted and routes of access thereto and there from; 
• Whether the event will require that the public spaces or facilities to be used or burdened, or the routes and means of access thereto and there from, be temporarily diverted from there dedicated or customary uses, or the public or private users thereof be diverted or excluded from or limited in their use or enjoyment of, or their access to or through, said spaces or facilities, before, during, and after the event. 
(3)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has in the past conducted or participated in an event of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and, if so, where and when such prior event(s) took place, and whether as a result of such event(s) the applicant or entity became a subject, whether or not then operating under the same name, as plaintiff or defendant, of any legal action, civil, criminal, or administrative. 
(4)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has defaulted upon or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant, or entity, whether or not then operating under the same name, as a result of participation in any prior event(s) or a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and if so, a description of said judgment or order and an explanation for noncompliance. 
(5)  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement in favor of the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees, in a form satisfactory to the attorney for the city. 
If, as a direct consequence of exigent, unanticipated, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, applicant is unable to file an application not less than 20 days before and event, nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the filing of an application at a later time, but such case the time limits for review by the city, and for review and appeal in the case of a denial of a permit, shall remain the same. 
Where an event conducted on, over, upon, or burdening public properties, or employing the facilities thereon, which is also to substantially involve or take place partly or wholly upon private property with the consent of the owner(s) thereof, such owner(s) or their authorized representatives must join as an applicant for any permit for such event. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, 4-26-2004) 
Sec. 11-243. - Review by the city. 
Within seven working days of receipt of an application, the city manager of the city shall review the application in light of all the contents thereof and the goals, intentions, and presumption of this article as set out hereinbefore, and render a decision and communicate same to applicant, either permitting the event as planned or denying a permit for same. If the permit is denied, the city manager of the city shall provide the applicant in writing a statement of the reason therefore. (First class mail to the address provided by applicant, postmarked no more than seven working days after receipt of the application, shall be sufficient for this, purpose, though not the exclusive means of notice.) 
Nothing in this process shall prevent the city manager of the city, at his/her sole option and within seven-day period for approval or denial, to confer with applicant with respect to modifications of applicant's plan for the event, and amend the application to reflect such modifications if agreed to by applicant. However, applicant may neither supplement nor amend its application within seven day period except at the invitation of the city. Any attempt to do so sua sponte shall be deemed a separate and new application. 
The city manager of the city may deny the application for permit upon any of the following reasons or combination of reasons: 
(1)  The application does not contain all required information, or that information set out is so incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent full and proper review by the city. 
(2)  The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations; 
(3)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant is incompetent to contact, sue, or be sued; 
(4)  The person applying lacks authority to represent the entity for which the application is made; 
(5)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions damaged public property, or has not paid in full for such damages, or is in arrears as to judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether under the same name(s) or another; 
(6)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature; 
(7)  The plan of the event as proposed would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of participants in the event or other member of the public (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(8)  The plan of the event as proposed would unduly restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public road, right-of-way, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such event; 
(9)  The plan of the event as proposed would constitute an unreasonable disturbance of the peace, or would unreasonably burden lawful commerce in the area at the time of the proposed event, or would unreasonably intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the proposed event (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(10)  The plan of the event as proposed includes activities which are prohibited by laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or ordinances of the city, county, or other lawful body or activities which constitute nuisance or tortuous conduct with respect to public or private property or persons. 
It is the specific intent of the city in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place and manner of events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. The factors enumerated above, which the city finds express and support the substantial and compelling interest of this governing body in the preservation of the rights and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health, and good order of its society, are only bases upon which the city manager of the city shall decide to issue or deny a permit applied for hereunder, and no such decision shall be made or justified based upon the anticipated or predicted content of the speech or expressive conduct of any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, 4-26-2004) 
Sec. 11-244. - Revocation. 
Notwithstanding the grant of any permit as provided herein, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate an event at any time, or prevent its initiation, should traffic, weather, or other conditions develop which present an imminent and undue danger to those participating in the event pursuant to said permit, to the public at large, or should any consideration or combination of considerations enumerated herein as a ground for denial of a permit arise or first become apparent to law enforcement authorities after the grant of a permit. If in preparation for or after the start of an event for which a permit has been issued, participants in said event violate the terms of the permit or deviate in material fashion from the plan submitted in application for the permit, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate the event. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, 4-26-2004) 
Sec. 11-245. - Administrative review by the city. 
Upon receipt of any decision by the city manager of the city denying an application, the applicant may within five calendar days file an appeal of said denial with the city councilpersons, which appeal shall be in writing and be sent to the city by certified mail or hand delivery. Upon receipt of any such appeal the city manager of the city shall notify the attorney for the city, who shall promptly (but in case no later than seven calendar days after receipt of the appeal) seek review of the denial of the permit as applied for by the applicant. If no appeal is filed by the applicant, there shall be no duty on the part of the city to seek judicial review of the decision of the city manager of the city. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the applicant from seeking judicial review of a denial of a permit in a court of competent jurisdiction at any time after notification of the decision on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-05, 4-26-2004) 
Secs. 11-246—11-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VENDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assistant vendor means a person who assists a vendor at such vendor's vending site. 
Blind person. A person shall be considered blind for the purpose of this article if such person's vision, with correcting glasses, is so defective as to prevent the performance of activities for which eyesight is essential. 
Flea market means any event at which two or more persons offer merchandise for sale or exchange; and at which a fee is charged for the privilege of offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange; or at which a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange; or regardless of the number of persons offering or displaying merchandise or the absence of fees, at which merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange if the event is held more than six times in any 12-month period. The term "flea market" applies regardless of whether such sale of merchandise is conducted out of doors or within a building. The primary characteristic is that these activities involve a series of sales sufficient in number, scope, and character to constitute a regular course of business. The term "flea market" shall not mean and shall not apply to any event which is organized for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association, or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational, or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee or parking fee charged vendors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings from the sale or exchange of merchandise, whether in the form of a percentage of the receipts or earnings, as salary, or otherwise, insures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event; or any event at which all persons selling, exchanging, or offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange are manufacturers or licensed retail or wholesale merchants. Flea markets shall not include developed and operating shopping centers, antique stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores, or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days, or other businesses of merchandise in common with flea markets where the vendor therein is not operating among a collection of vendors or renting or securing individual space within an overall operation. 
Flea market promoter, operator, or owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity which owns, operates, maintains, manages, or promotes flea markets. 
Flea market vendor means any person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity of any type or character who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at a flea market. "Flea market vendor" shall not include licensed second-hand goods dealers or pawnbrokers. In addition to being subject to any regulations pertaining specifically to flea market vendors that may be included in this article, flea market vendors shall be subject to all regulations within this article pertaining generally to vendors. 
Moral turpitude means the act or behavior of baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which people owe to their fellow people, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between person and person; act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community and is a morally suitable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others. 
Permissible food item means any food product or substance, including beverages, that legally may be dispensed for the public's consumption pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Camden County Health Department. 
Private property vending means vending activity conducted out-of-doors or in a flea market on private property not owned by the city or by any other governmental agency. Produce means any agricultural product raised on a farm or orchard. 
Recording means a tangible medium on which sounds, images, or both are recorded or otherwise stored, including an original phonograph record, disc, tape, audio or video cassette, wire, film, or other medium now existing or developed later on which sounds, images, or both are or can be recorded or otherwise stored, or a copy or reproduction that duplicates in whole or in part the original. An illicit recording is a recording produced without the authorization of the recording's owner, or which is otherwise sold or offered for sale in violation of any state or federal law pertaining thereto. 
Registered agent means any person who is authorized by a vendor or itinerant vendor and who agrees to accept service or process and legal notices on behalf of the vendor or itinerant vendor. 
Seasonal vendor means a temporary vendor who vends from private property at a fixed location for seasonal vending. 
Site plan means a visual depiction of the vending site showing 1) the exact location of the vending operation on the property; 2) the length, width, and height of the vending stand; 3) the location of all on-site parking spaces which serve the property; and 4) the location of any power sources which the vendor intends to use. The site plan shall be filed along with each application. 
Stand means any fixed or movable structure, table or device used by a vendor for the purpose of displaying or storing any merchandise, article or food which is offered for sale. 
Valid vendor location means an area which is authorized in this article in which vending can take place. 
Valid vendor permit means a permit issued by the community planning and development department. Such permit shall consist of an identification card which contains the vendor's name, vending type and classification, authorized location and time period for which such permit is valid. 
Vending business means any commercial enterprise operated for profit in which merchandise, food, produce/seafood, services or a combination thereof are rendered for sale to the general public on private property and approved by the city. 
Vendor means any person whose primary business is the selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefore, any goods, wares, merchandise, services, food, produce, seafood, confectionery or drink carried by hand from portable stands or tables, by manually propelled vehicles, or by motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-252. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Vending on private property in the city, as defined in section 11-252, shall be subject to regulation as set forth in this article, including the requirement of regulatory licenses and permits. 
(b)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to: 
(1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable. 
(3)  Provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city. 
(4)  Provide a variety of goods and services for sale. 
(5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambiance and be assets to public security. 
(6)  Ensure that persons vending on private property have the permission of the property owner prior to providing goods and services to the public. 
(7)  Ensure that persons vending on private property do not impede on public vending spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-253. - Vending business required to keep records. 
(a)  Every vendor, including flea market vendors, shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in ink and in legible English at the time any property is acquired for the purpose of retail sale. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the suspension or revocation of any permit by the community planning and development department, or the Kingsland City Council in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Vendors, by filing an application, agree to produce documents and records which may be considered pertinent to the ascertainment of facts relative to the issuance and maintenance of the license, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The vendor's bank or other financial institution records, including those which are personal or from any business in which the vendor has any interest, such as savings and checking account records, bank statements, ledgers, deposit tickets, withdrawal slips, canceled checks, check stubs, bank drafts, cashier's checks, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, pass books and applications for each account; 
(2)  Personal state and federal income tax statements for the past five years; and 
(3)  Records of sales and receipts for purchases and expenses from any business in which a vendor has any interest. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-254. - Vending restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  Persons vending on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(2)  Within ten feet of any driveway. 
(3)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
(4)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. 
(5)  Within 1,500 feet of a permanent business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall not apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 1,500 persons. 
(b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. 
(c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Kingsland Noise Ordinance. 
(f)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Kingsland Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-255. - Littering. 
All vendors engaged in food vending shall affix to their vending station a receptacle for litter, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly and which shall be marked as being for litter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-256. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: 
(1)  First conviction. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs. 
(2)  Second conviction. A fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs. 
(3)  Third conviction. A fine of not less than $500.00 not more than $1,000.00 and costs. 
(4)  Fourth conviction. Any person convicted of four or more violations of this article within any 12-month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 not more than $1,000.00 and costs; and revocation of their permit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-257. - Aesthetic standards. 
(a)  Vending is permitted from skirted tables only. Tables shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the covered canopy area. 
(b)  Canopy. If used, must be a portable folding canopy only. One canopy shall be permitted (not required), shall be white in color, shall not contain any writing and shall not exceed ten 20 feet in size. 
(c)  Vending structures must be removed from the open vending site when the vendor is not doing business and during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Vending structures must be in good repair at all times. 
(e)  Merchandise shall be displayed on the table only and shall be stored within the interior area of the canopy. 
(f)  All storage of merchandise shall be beneath the skirted tables. 
(g)  If signage is allowed, no more than one sign which shall not exceed two × three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. 
(h)  A description of the structure and the hours of operation shall be included in the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Secs. 11-258—11-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 11-261. - Vendor permit and business license required. 
(a)  No person shall vend any article, merchandise, produce, permissible food item, or service on private property in the city without first having obtained an initial vending permit and satisfied all other requirements, including but not limited to those of the Camden County Health Department. No permit shall be required for persons selling newspapers at-large other than from a fixed location on private property. 
(b)  No person shall vend in the city on privately-owned property, except in conformity with the privileges granted for the particular class or permit issued to such person, and only on the location stated on the permit. This permit requirements is in addition to any general business license required or other special permission requirement. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business or trade of vending without first obtaining a business license from the department of community planning and development. Disabled veterans and blind persons, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, are exempt from payment of business license fees, but must obtain such licenses. 
(d)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors or assistant vendors, or registered agents are nontransferable, and must be displayed in clear view, together with the vending permit photo identification card, at the permitted location at all times when the vendor or assistant vendor is present. 
(e)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors, shall contain a general description of the merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof to be offered for sale by such vendor at the permitted location, and shall indicate if the permit authorizes the sale of recordings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-262. - Classification of permits. 
(a)  Food permit. A food permit shall authorize a person to vend permissible food items in an individually assigned vending site or from a motor vehicle, but not from door-to-door. A food permit shall allow the sale of food only pursuant to the conditions specified by the Camden County Health Department. 
(b)  Produce/seafood permit. A produce/seafood permit shall authorize a person to vend permissible unprocessed agriculture and raw seafood items in an individually assigned vending site or from a motor vehicle, but not from door-to-door. A produce/seafood permit shall allow the sale of produce and seafood only pursuant to the conditions specified by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(c)  Merchandise permit. A merchandise permit shall authorize a person to vend items including but not limited to the following from a designated location on private property: 
(1)  Crafts: 
a.  Baskets. 
b.  Jewelry. 
c.  Leather. 
d.  Quilts. 
e.  Wood carvings. 
f.  Needle crafts. 
g.  Fragrances/incenses. 
(2)  Fresh flowers. 
(3)  Clothing and apparel. 
(4)  Seasonal items, such as Christmas trees, firewood. 
(5)  Accessories: 
a.  Leather goods. 
b.  Sunglasses. 
c.  Umbrellas. 
(6)  Licensed nonethnic apparel. In order to vend any items which are licensed by an organization (e.g., the Braves), a vendor must have a license from the appropriate organization to sell such goods and must produce such license to the police department or code enforcement for inspection when requested. 
(d)  Service permit. A service permit shall authorize a person to sell services, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Face paintings. 
(2)  Shoe shining. 
(3)  Portrait painting. 
(4)  Street music. 
(5)  Photography. 
(e)  Combination permit. A combination permit shall authorize a person to vend food, produce/seafood and/or merchandise at individually assigned vending sites and locations. Any person may apply for and receive a combination permit, if all applicable requirements are met. 
(f)  Flea market vending permit. In addition to any other permits that must be obtained pursuant to paragraphs (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section for the items or services sold, a flea market vending permit shall authorize the sale of items or services by a flea market vendor. Such a permit must be obtained by a flea market vendor as well as by any flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Flea market vending permits obtained by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall authorize the operation of the flea market. Such flea market vending permits shall be administered in the same manner as other permits required under this article, and the holders of such permits shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this article as a condition to holding such permits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-263. - Annual application. 
(a)  An application shall be required by all persons seeking issuance of an initial permit for vending on private property, and such application shall be filed annually. Each applicant must apply in person and complete an application form. Application forms may be obtained from and filed with the department of community planning and development. 
(b)  A nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 is required to accompany each application for an initial private property vendor's permit. 
(c)  Permit fees for food, merchandise, service or combination permits are due and payable if and when the application is approved by the city. 
(d)  The application for an initial private property vendor's permit shall, at a minimum, consist of the following data: 
(1)  Each applicant shall submit detailed data as follows: 
a.  Applicant's name and current address. 
b.  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. 
c.  Social Security number. 
d.  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. 
e.  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. 
f.  Name and current address of each proposed assistant vendor. 
g.  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. 
h.  State department of revenue retail identification tax number. 
i.  State I.D. 
j.  City business license. 
k.  A general description of the food, merchandise, or services to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether recordings will be sold or offered for sale. 
(2)  All applicants who intend to vend from private property must present to the department of planning and community development a private property permission letter on the form as issued by the department. The private property permission letter shall be provided along with the permit application and shall be a part of the required site plan. Such vendors shall be subject to all zoning restrictions except that food vending from motorized vehicles may be allowed in residential subdivisions during the period of active development. This provision must be followed each and every time a vendor changes location. 
(3)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the department of community planning and development within 30 days from the date of request. Failure to furnish such information within 30 days shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-264. - Application procedure. 
All private property vendor applications shall be reviewed to determine compliance with applicable zoning regulations. Subject to favorable determination and a private property permission letter, the department of community planning and development shall issue the business license for the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-265. - Term and renewal of permits. 
(a)  In order to commence vending on private property, all vendors must have an initial permit issued and must meet all the qualifications set forth herein before reapplying for a permit. The length of time that a vendor on private property may remain on such property, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 11-262(a), but including those holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 11-262(b)—(d), shall be two years. A vendor permit for a private property vending location will be issued for a one-year period. When the one-year permit expires, a vendor may apply for a renewal permit which allows the vendor to vend for another one-year period. After a vendor has been issued a renewal permit to vend on the same parcel of land for an additional year, the vendor, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 11-262(a), but including these holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 11-262(b)—(d), may not vend at such location and may not renew a vending permit for such location for two years. At the expiration of the two-year vending term, the property owner shall not allow another vendor to vend on said property for a period of 90 days. 
(b)  No applicant shall be issued more than one permit: provided that an applicant for a flea market vending permit may be issued a flea market vending permit in addition to any other permit. 
(c)  After the initial permit fee for the first year expires, vendors may present to the department of planning and community development an application for a renewal permit. Upon a review and approval of the renewal application by the appropriate agencies, satisfaction of all other license and permit requirements, and upon payment of the appropriate fee as indicated in section 11-266, the department shall furnish the applicant with a renewal permit. 
(d)  Each applicant for a renewal application shall submit an application which shall at a minimum consist of the following data: 
(1)  Applicant's name and current address. 
(2)  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. 
(3)  Social Security number. 
(4)  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. 
(5)  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. 
(6)  Names and current addresses of proposed assistant vendors. 
(7)  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. 
(8)  City business license. 
(9)  A general description of the food, merchandise, services, or combination thereof to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether the permit authorizes the sale or offering for sale of recordings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-266. - Fees. 
(a)  Initial permit fees are due and payable by certified funds after approval of the initial vending application. Initial permit fees for vending shall be as follows: 

 
In no event shall a vending permit be issued prior to payment of the above fees. 
(b)  The fee for a replacement vending permit that has been lost shall be $30.00 and may be obtained at the department of planning and community development. 
(c)  Fees for renewal permits shall be the same as those fees for new permits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-267. - Location. 
Permits are to be used only for the location specified in the vendor's application and such location shall be clearly written on the permit. The vendor or an assistant vendor to whom the permit is issued shall be present at the location specified on the permit at all such times as merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof are sold or offered for sale at such location. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-268. - Notification of name change or change of address. 
Whenever either the name or address provided by the permit holder on the application for a vending permit or health or building inspection certificate changes, the licensee shall notify the department of planning and community development in writing within ten days of such change and provide same with the name change or address change. Vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address and mailing address are on file with department at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-269. - Denials, revocation and suspension. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for vending to any person who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor relating to alcohol or drug offenses and related matter; crimes of moral turpitude; gambling offenses and related matters, larceny, fraudulent conveyance, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation. Any conviction for dealing and/or trafficking in illegal drugs will automatically disqualify a vending applicant. 
(b)  Failure to maintain initial qualifications shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(c)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the department of planning and community development for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for the vending permits. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in connection with the selling of any article, merchandise, produce or permissible food item. 
(3)  Violation of the provisions of the Camden County Health Department regulations applicable holders of food permits. 
(4)  Violation of the provisions of the Georgia Department of Agriculture regulations applicable holders of produce/seafood permits. 
(5)  Conduct of a vending business in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a menace or detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(6)  Failure on the part of a vendor to maintain initial eligibility qualifications. 
(7)  Failure on the part of the vendor's assistant to maintain initial eligibility qualifications shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the vendor's assistant permit. 
(8)  Failure to furnish any and all documentation requested by either the police department, the department of planning and community development or code enforcement for purposes of the investigation of any application or for the inspection of records pursuant to section 11-253 within 30 days of such request. 
(9)  Failure to abide by the duties imposed on the permit holder pursuant to section 11-271. 
(d)  Any person whose permit is revoked may not reapply for a vending permit until after the expiration of one year from the date of revocation. Four violations of any part of this article within a 12-month period shall constitute grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a vendor permit. 
(e)  In addition to carrying out all other investigations as may be permitted under this article, the code enforcement section shall investigate any alleged violation of this article upon receipt of a written, sworn complaint by any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a potential violation. Such complaint shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be accompanied by any supporting evidence. After receiving a properly filed complaint, the code enforcement section shall conduct its investigation and, based on the results of such investigation, may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article to the person who is the subject of such complaint by providing notice as required by section 11-270(b). A copy of such notice also shall be provided to the person who filed the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-270. - Public hearing on suspension, revocation or denial. 
(a)  A suspension, revocation or denial of a permit issued under this division may be appealed to the city council within 20 days of the applicant or permit holder's receipt of notice as described in subsection (b). 
(b)  Notice of the dental, suspension or revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth the complaint, the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation, and the time, date and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the vending permit holder at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by registered of certified mail to the address shown on the application. 
(c)  After a public hearing, the city council shall make a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-271. - Duties of permit holder. 
Every person authorized to vend under this article shall: 
(1)  A vendor shall comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a vending business; 
(2)  A vendor shall refrain from engaging in any vending business after the expiration of the vendor permit and during any period when it has been suspended or revoked; 
(3)  A vendor shall surrender the vendor permit promptly to the code enforcement section upon its expiration, or upon revocation or suspension. 
(4)  A vendor shall have no more than two assistants who shall first obtain assistant vendor permits from the department of community planning and development. At no time shall more than three vendors or assistant vendors be present at the assigned vending location. 
(5)  A vendor conducting a vending business out-of-doors on private property within any zoning district in which such activities are permitted by the city's zoning code, shall be regulated by the provisions of such zoning district. 
(6)  A vendor shall be responsible for the on-site activities of the vendor's assistants. 
(7)  No vendor or flea market vendor shall sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. 
(8)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. 
(9)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any services, merchandise, or combination thereof unless the vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of all assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 11-261(d). 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-272. - Duties of flea market promoter, operator, or owner. 
(a)  Every flea market promoter, operator, or owner authorized to operate a flea market under this article shall, on a regular basis, inspect or cause to be inspected the merchandise sold or offered for sale by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Such inspections shall also verify that each vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of any assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 11-261(d). Such inspections shall be carried out on at least a monthly basis during the time the flea market is in operation; provided that the inspection of merchandise maintained by flea market vendors selling recordings shall be inspected on a weekly basis. In connection with such regular inspections, flea market promoters, operators, or owners shall be authorized to inspect the records maintained by flea market vendors pursuant to section 11-253. Should the flea market vendor fail or refuse to provide such merchandise for inspection, or should the inspection of such merchandise or any records kept regarding such merchandise indicate to the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee, that illicit recordings are being sold or offered for sale by the flea market vendor, the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee shall within 24 hours provide such information, together with information identifying the flea market vendor, to law enforcement officials, and take all such other actions as may be reasonable under the circumstances to stop such illegal activities, including the filing of a written complaint as provided in section 11-269(e). 
(b)  Failure by a flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee to carry out the inspections required by this section to report the failure or refusal of flea market vendors to make merchandise or any associated records available for inspection by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee; or to report the sale or offering for sale of illicit recordings to law enforcement officials within 24 hours shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the flea market promoter's, operator's, or owner's flea market vending permit, as provided in section 11-269. 
(c)  Each flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall, as a condition of receiving a flea market vending permit for the operation of any flea market, certify that he or she is aware of the duties imposed on flea market promoters, operators, and owners to take all actions as required by this section to prevent the sale of illicit recordings by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Sec. 11-273. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of chapter 11, article VI (section 11-251 et seq.) shall not apply to any real person who engages only in outdoor sales of merchandise no more than two days in any one-week period, but who otherwise meets the definition of flea market vendor as defined in section 11-251. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14, 6-9-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, 9-29-2009) 
Chapter 12 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; traffic and vehicles, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const., art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for coordination of information between affected county, city and state agencies, and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § I, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definition. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "mobile home" means a mobile or relocatable home as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § II, 9-9-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall do any act prohibited by this chapter or shall fail to do any act required by this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and will be treated as such. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § VIII, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-4. - Applicability of zoning regulations. 
The issuance of any permit under the provisions of this chapter shall be in no way construed as superseding the requirements for the location or relocation of mobile homes as required by state law and local ordinance. The issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the city planning and building department, or other administrative agencies, from requiring a relocation permit for the mobile home place where such mobile home is permitted by the regulations of a planning commission. In such case, if the move is required by a planning commission, the owner of such mobile home shall apply for and obtain a permit under this chapter for such relocation as if such relocation was the result of his own initiative. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § III, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-5. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall own or have located within the city any mobile home unless application for a permit shall have been made and a permit received as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall initially locate, relocate or remove any mobile home in the city without having made such application and having obtained such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § IV, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-6. - Administrative fee. 
There is hereby imposed an administrative fee to cover the administrative costs of implementing the provisions of this chapter, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Such fee shall be paid to the tax commissioner by the owner at the time that the mobile home decal is secured. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § VI, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-7. - Decal. 
All persons owning a mobile home based in the city on January 1 of each year shall obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before April 1, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493. This requirement includes all mobile homes, even if exempt from taxation because of homestead exemption or in accordance with state law. Owners of mobile homes locating in the city after January 1 of any year shall be required to report their mobile homes to the tax commissioner's office within ten working days. Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection from the street or drive. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § VII, 9-9-85) 
Sec. 12-8. - Reports by park owners and operators. 
(a)  Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to give the tax commissioner an inventory of all mobile homes based in the park as of January 1 of each year. An updated lot map of each park showing any changes shall be furnished to the tax commissioner for this purpose. This shall be done no later than January 20 of each year. The tax office will make available an inventory of record as of January 1. 
(b)  Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to report any mobile home removals from the park prior to the home being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner. Any mobile home added to the mobile home park shall be reported to the tax commissioner within ten working days of the mobile home arrival. 
(Ord. No. 1985-24, § V, 9-9-85) 
Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(a) any reference in any local law to a corporate court, police court, recorder's court, or mayor's court which has jurisdiction over the violation of municipal offenses shall be deemed to mean a municipal court. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Schedule of fines and forfeitures. 
(a)  The current Kingsland Municipal Court schedule of fines and forfeitures as set forth in Resolution No. 2001-06, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office, is hereby confirmed and adopted. 
(b)  In addition to the schedule of fines and forfeitures as set forth in subsection (a), an additional $25.00 surcharge fee is imposed on persons convicted of traffic offenses or violations, in order to provide funding for acquisition, repair and maintenance of computer software for the municipal court of the city, and also for technology that is deemed appropriate by the mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, §§ 1, 2, 4-22-2002) 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; open burning, § 8-1; offenses and miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Unlawful to sell muffler which causes excessive noise, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. The fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Abatement generally. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of the city, except for a nuisance specifically excepted, may be abated in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)  Initiation of proceedings. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, may be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city clerk, which complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the nuisance is a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the mayor and city council. Such notice shall be served at least two days prior to the date set for the hearing, by any police officer of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein. A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant. 
(3)  Issuance of order. If, after hearing all the evidence, the mayor and city council decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the mayor shall issue an order, directed to the chief of police or any member of the police force, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the parties maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Failure to comply with order. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the mayor, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
Sec. 14-3. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 14-2 shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Sec. 14-4. - Nuisances designated; prohibited conditions. 
(a)  Within the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy outdoor toilets or unkept stables or anything having an offensive odor, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person, are declared nuisances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property within the city to allow garbage, trash, debris, weeds, vines, grass or other vegetation, whether cut or growing, to accumulate thereon, which would be likely to become a breeding place for snakes, rodents, flies, gnats, mosquitoes or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a health hazard for any other reason or may become a hazard to traffic on the public streets of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the city to allow any house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground owned or occupied by him to contain or have thereon any filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter or obnoxious odors of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, 12-14-87) 
Sec. 14-5. - Accumulation of refuse; cutting of grass and weeds. 
(a)  Within the city it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain his premises, including vacant lots or land, in such a way as to allow trash, garbage or miscellaneous refuse to accumulate, if the condition of the property causes a nuisance, causes injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity or causes injury to neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carryout food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous refuse. 
(b)  Within the city it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds become a breeding place for insects, rodents or reptiles or constitute a fire hazard. 
Sec. 14-6. - Emission of gases, vapors or odors. 
No person shall cause, suffer or allow any emissions of gases, vapors or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as are or likely to be injurious to the public welfare, to the health of human, plant or animal life or to property, or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
State Law reference— County's and municipality's power to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Georgia Air Quality Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-7. - Loud or unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 8-301 through 8-307 of the 1968 City Code relating to the making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  An official copy of the provisions described in subsection (a) of this section is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 14-8. - Use of sound amplifiers prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place or on any public right-of-way. 
(b)  The above shall not apply to radios, amplified voice, bands or music in private homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance or not more than 25 feet from the private premises of such residence or more than 25 feet from such private vehicle; nor shall it apply to noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in public parades or procession which has been granted a permit for such parade or procession in accordance with ordinances of the city. Provided, however, the city council may grant a permit, or request, for use of a stationary loudspeaker or amplifier at a public celebration or ceremony or public speaking which is deemed by them to be in the interest of the general public and the community. 
(c)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this section. By order of the city council this law is not to be construed as a "Catch All Ordinance". Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-16, 8-27-2001) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-16, adopted Aug. 27, 2001 pertained to use of sound amplifiers prohibited; exceptions and was designated as § 14-7.2. With the city's concurrence the editor has redesignated § 14-7.2 as § 14-8. 
Secs. 14-9—14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002 repealed the former Art. II, §§ 14-21—14-36 and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to unfit buildings and derived from Ord. No. 1991-3, §§ 1-5, 7-13, adopted Aug. 26, 1991; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2001. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5. 

Sec. 14-21. - Title and scope. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be entitled "City of Kingsland Nuisance Abatement Ordinance". 
(b)  Authority and scope. This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 41, Chapter 2, Sections 7 through 17, as amended, and is referenced herein as the "Act". All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the Act are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-22. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing or crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Director shall mean the Director of Community Planning and Zoning for the City of Kingsland. 
Hearing officer means the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Kingsland authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 to conduct a hearing as required by this article. 
Owner or owners means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have a property interest as recorded in the public records of Camden County, Georgia in a dwelling, building, or structure. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership (general or limited), estate, trust or other entity or artificial person, or combination thereof. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city involved with the health, fire, or building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
Public officer means the city manager (or his designee) who shall exercise the primary responsibilities created under the applicable provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-23. - Inspection and notice of hearing. 
(a)  Inspection and notices. Whenever a written request for inspection is filed with the city by a public authority, by at least five residents of the city, or by the director of community planning and zoning, charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation; or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes; or whenever it otherwise appears to the director of community planning and zoning that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation; or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes; or there is present on the property an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the director shall initiate the action set forth in subsection (b). 
(b)  The complaint. The director shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charge(s), issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest of such dwelling, building or structure unfit for human habitation; or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or vacant, dilapidated and being used in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes, a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or the hearing officer). The complaint shall state the conditions which exist and specify the violations of this article or any other article or other article or provision of the Code of the city, including but not limited to its building code, housing code, and other provisions pertaining to the conditions of buildings, dwellings and structures, and shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the hearing officer pursuant to section 14-24 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-24. - Hearing. 
(a)  Time and place. The hearing will be held at a place within the city as designated in the complaint on a day and time certain which shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. 
(b)  The proceedings. The hearing officer shall preside at the hearing. The person conducting the hearing shall have authority to administer oaths or affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence at the hearing. The rules of evidence prevailing in a court of law or equity shall not be controlling in the hearing. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded or taken down or made by such other procedure as may be undertaken either in a verbatim or summary form so as to be reasonably accurate. 
(c)  The records. The director shall be the supervisor and custodian of the records of each property against which a complaint is issued and any hearing held. Such records shall be public records and made available to any owner or party in interest and copies thereof provided upon the payment of such reasonable cost as may be incurred in duplicating or otherwise providing them. The records shall be preserved for not less than four years after the proceedings and action, if any, regarding the property, are concluded. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-25. - Orders for corrective action. 
(a)  Decision. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation; or it is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, or is vacant, dilapidated and is being used in connection with the commission of drug crime or crimes and that the facts in the record support such determination and a conclusion by the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall enter an order. Absent such a finding of facts in the records, the complaint shall be dismissed. 
(b)  Order. If warranted by the hearing officer's decision, the hearing officer shall make a determination that such building, dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation or its current commercial, industrial or business use, or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, in the form of an order which shall contain: 
(1)  A determination that the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, improved or altered either at a cost of one-half or less of the value of the dwelling, building or structure exclusive of foundation and land after the improvements have been made, or at a cost of more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of the foundation and land after improvements have been made. If the cost to repair, improve or alter such structure is more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of foundation and land after the improvements have been made, the order may find that such structure be vacated and removed or demolished within a specified time frame. If the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, altered or improved at a cost that is less than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of foundation and land after improvements have been made, the order may find either that the structure be rendered fit for human habitation or current commercial, industrial or business use within a specified time or shall be vacated and closed and secured against entry. 
(2)  An enumeration of conditions which render the dwelling, building or structure unfit for human habitation or other uses and a description of the remedial action necessary to correct each of the conditions. 
(3)  A requirement that if the owner and/or parties in interest elect to undertake the necessary remedial action, the hearing officer shall establish: 
a.  A specific period of time, reasonably established in relationship to the remedial action, during which such action must be commenced, including if necessary, separate commencement dates as to separate defects or work; and 
b.  A specific period of time after the required commencement date of such remedial action, reasonably established in relationship to the necessary undertakings, within which such action defects or work is to be completed. 
(4)  A requirement that if the owner and/or the parties in interest do not notify the public officer of the intent to comply within 30 days of service (or publication) of the order for corrective action for a building, dwelling or structure which can be repaired at one-half or less of its value, the director shall subsequently commence and complete the vacating and closing of the dwelling, building or structure; or in the case of a building or dwelling which cannot be repaired at one-half or less of the value, to commence and complete the vacating and removal or demolition of the building, dwelling or structure. 
(5)  A statement that failure to comply with the order within the required time above set forth is in violation of this article and shall subject the parties and property to the remedies set forth in this article. 
(6)  Where a condition exists regarding any property which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or adjacent property, the public officer may shorten the time periods specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-26. - Placarding. 
When the owner and/or the parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure and the public officer causes such dwelling, building or structure and premises to be vacated and closed, and the public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling, building or structure to be closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or other use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or other use is prohibited and unlawful." 
The placard shall bear the date posted, street number of the dwelling, building or structure involved and the signature of the public officer. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed, or for such dwelling, building or structure to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-27. - Failure to comply with order. 
(a)  When the owner and/or the parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove or demolish or vacate a dwelling, building or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building or structure to be vacated, demolished, removed or repaired; however, that duty shall not be exercised until the mayor and council have adopted a resolution containing an appropriate legal description, directing the public officer to take the necessary action to insure compliance with the provisions of the ordinance with respect to the property in issue. 
(b)  Upon receiving the resolution from mayor and council, the public officer shall have such dwelling, building or structure vacated, demolished, removed or repaired by private contractor, or by utilizing city forces. The public officer shall notify and request reimbursement from the owner and/or the parties in interest of the costs incurred by the city to vacate, demolish, remove or repair the structure. Failure by the owner and/or parties in interest to promptly reimburse the city will result in the city filing a lien on the property for the costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-28. - Demolition. 
No person shall begin demolition until a city demolition permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street or property line. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-29. - Lien on property. 
(a)  The cost of vacating, removing, closing and/or demolition of the structure by the city shall be a lien for such amount against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. The city shall file a notice of lien against the real property in the real property records section, Office of Clerk of Camden County Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(f). The lien shall attach to the real property until the city receives payment of all costs of action by the city. At the discretion of the public officer, a monthly payment plan may be arranged for a time period not to exceed 48 months. 
(b)  If the dwelling, building or structure is demolished under a private contract or by city forces which results in proceeds of such contract or sale of materials, the funds shall be credited against the cost of the demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited by the public officer in the Superior Court of Camden County and shall be disbursed by court order to the owner or party in interest. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-13, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-30. - Procedure for collection of amount due on lien. 
The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien arising under this article in the following manner: 
(1)  Amount. The amount of the lien shall be established as follows: the costs of administration to be assessed against properties and service shall be established by ordinance. The cost of vacating, removal, closing or demolition shall be the cost paid or incurred by the city in effecting action against any property. 
(2)  Notice of lien. The owner and/or parties in interest shall be served with a copy of the lien and shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within the 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money not less than 25 percent of the total due on such lien, and by further paying the remaining balance due, together with interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(3)  Transfer of property. Should such property be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner and/or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year payment period, the entire balance due on such lien, with earnest interest, shall be due and payable to the city. 
(4)  Collection. Should the amount due on the lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after it is due, or upon the occurrence of the situation provided for in subsection (2) above, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 and other applicable statutes, which shall be subject to the right of redemption by the owner or party in interest or lien upon the property; all as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-40 to 48-4-48. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-31. - Service of notice and orders. 
Service of complaints shall be effected as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(1)  Costs. The costs of service pursuant to this section shall be included in the sums otherwise due under this article. 
(2)  Service. A police officer of the city shall be authorized to perform the service of all documents pursuant to this article in the manner usually performed by sheriffs or their deputies provided they follow the procedures established by statute for those officials, and a fee may be assessed against the property so long as it does not exceed the fee currently imposed by the Sheriff of Camden County for similar activities. Any notice pursuant to this section, any order issued pursuant to section 14-24, or any other post-hearing action affecting property may be served upon the owner and parties in interest by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the address specified in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as applicable, and to the address of the property, if it is occupied on the date of inspection, care of "occupant". If any party has specified to the director prior to or at the hearing an address for notice, that address shall be used for notices. 
(3)  Failure to answer complaint. If the owner and the parties in interest neither file an answer to the complaint nor appear at the hearing, and a decision is rendered which affects the property, an advertisement shall be published in the newspaper utilized for city marshal tax sales for two consecutive weekdays that a hearing was conducted, a summary of the general findings of the hearing, the action required as pertaining to the property, and the consequences which may result from noncompliance with the ordinance or notice. A notice may identify more than one property which was the subject of a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-32. - Appeal to superior court. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may file a direct appeal to the Superior Court of Camden County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the final order by the public officer. The appeal in the superior court shall be a de novo investigation. The superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-33. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner or party in interest of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state, or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the state. Procedures under this article shall not be construed to be an exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-34. - Right to enter and inspect. 
The director, any person authorized to enforce this article, and any uniformed officer of the city police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. If such entry is refused, such official may obtain an order ex parte from a judge of the Magistrate Court of Camden County pursuant to an affidavit setting forth the (i) name(s) and address(es) of the owner and any party in interest, and the person refusing entry, (ii) the date and time entry was attempted, (iii) the reason why entry was not effected, (iv) the means by which and by whom entry is proposed, (v) the reason why entry is necessary, and (vi) the predicate creating probable cause that entry and inspection is necessary. The court order shall specify a date and time for a hearing before the court to determine whether entry shall be immediate entry and inspection, whereupon such authority may then be granted. The court order with a copy of the affidavit shall be served pursuant to the provisions applicable to service of subpoenas issued from the court. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-35. - Construction. 
This article shall be cumulative of other ordinances and code provisions applicable to property and improvements in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Sec. 14-36. - Code of Georgia. 
Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 11-12-2002) 
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Altering Code, § 1-9; general penalty, § 1-12; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; nuisances, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 16; solid waste management, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-15, adopted Aug. 27, 2001 amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, § 15-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Aug. 1, 1974; Ord. No. 1979-1, adopted Sept. 12, 1979. 

Sec. 15-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  "Disorderly conduct" shall mean the commission of such words, acts and conduct upon public property, upon private property that is open to the general public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which under ordinary circumstances will naturally tend to disturb the public peace, tranquility or decorum, scandalize the community, or shock the public sense of morality. Any person who engages in an act of disorderly conduct shall be guilty of an offense against the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following specific acts and conduct shall be deemed a violation of this section: 
(1)  Fighting by two or more persons to the disturbance of the public tranquility; 
(2)  Use of obscene, vulgar, opprobrious or abusive language, without provocation, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to another person in the presence of the speaker, tend to provoke violence resentment; that is words commonly called "fighting words"; 
(3)  Being and appearing in an intoxicated condition which is outwardly made manifest by boisterousness; by indecent condition or act such as to offend sentiments of delicacy and modesty universally recognized in civilized society; or by loud, vulgar, profane, opprobrious, abusive or unbecoming language, which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(4)  Any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, parade or procession; 
(5)  Obstruction of any highway, road, street, sidewalk, passage or parking area in such a way as to render it impassible without reasonable inconvenience or hazard and the failure or refusal to remove such obstruction upon being lawfully commanded to do so by a police officer. 
(6)  Engaging in boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing acts after receiving oral warning from a police officer that such activities have caused complaint or annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the peaceful assembly of citizens in a lawful manner, the free exercises of protected speech, nor shall the mere possibility of disorder justify the exclusion of persons otherwise entitled to be present. 
(d)  Any person charged with a violation of this section shall have the right, upon written demand filed with the clerk of the municipal court and a copy thereof served upon the city attorney, to a jury trial, upon a finding by the municipal court that probable cause exists to bind the case over to the appropriate state court. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, 8-27-2001) 
Sec. 15-2. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person(s) from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant depart. 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, 8-27-2001) 
Sec. 15-3. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provision of this article. By order of the city council this law is not to be construed as a "Catch All Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2001-15, 8-27-2001) 
Secs. 15-4—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 15-26. - Assault. 
No person in the city shall beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another where the circumstances show malice. No person shall assault another with a lethal weapon, instrument or thing with intent to commit upon the person of another any bodily injury where no considerable provocation appears or where the circumstances of the assault show malice. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(3)) 
State Law reference— Simple assault, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20; aggravated assault, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-21. 
Sec. 15-27. - Fighting. 
No person in the city shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(4)) 
State Law reference— Simple battery, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20; aggravated battery, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-21. 
Sec. 15-28. - Public intoxication. 
No person in the city shall be present upon, in or over any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways or public places while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or beverages. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(2)) 
State Law reference— Restriction on enforcement of local ordinances relating to drinking, being a common drunkard, or being found in an intoxicated condition, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-11. 
Sec. 15-29. - Begging. 
No person in the city shall go about wandering and begging, or go about from door to door of private homes or commercial and business establishments or places himself in or upon any public way or public place to beg or receive alms for himself. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(5)(e)) 
Sec. 15-30. - Disturbing religious worship. 
No person in the city shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place of worship; or so near the place as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting, including the driving or operation of vehicles, motorcycles, motor scooters, bicycles or any other motor conveyance without having the exhaust thereof muffled. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(6)) 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 15-31. - Use of fireworks. 
(a)  No person in the city shall use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks indoors or within right-of-way of a public road, street, highway, or railroad of this city. 
(1)  It shall be lawful for any person 18 years of age or older to use or ignite or cause to be ignited or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store consumer fireworks. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for any person 18 years of age or older to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks: 
(1)  On any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the ending time of 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  On any day after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. if such use or ignition is lawful pursuant to any noise ordinance of the City of Kingsland or the location in which such use or ignition occurs; 
(3)  On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m.; and 
(4)  On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. 
(c)  It shall be lawful for any person 18 years of age or older in the city to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks anywhere in the city except: 
(1)  As provided for under subparagraph (a) of this section; 
(2)  In any location where such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is not lawfully present or is not otherwise lawfully permitted to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks; or 
(3)  Within 100 yards of a an electric plant; water treatment plant; waste-water treatment plant; a facility engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids or gases where the volume stored is in excess of 500 gallons for the purpose of retail sale; a facility engaged in the production, refining, processing, or blending of any flammable or combustible liquids or gases for retail purposes; any public or private electric substation; or a jail; or 
(4)  Within 100 yards of the boundaries of any public use air facility provided for under Title 6 or any public use landing area or platform marked and designed for landing use by helicopters; 
(5)  Within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of a governing authority of a municipal corporation, except pursuant to a special use permit as provided for in subparagraph (d) of this section; 
(6)  Within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the State of Georgia, except pursuant to any rules and regulations of the agency or department having control of such property which may allow for such use or ignition of consumer fireworks; 
(7)  Within 100 yards of a hospital, nursing home, or other health care facility regulated under Chapter 7 of Title 31; provided, however, that an owner or operator of such facility may use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility or may grant written permission to any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility; or 
(8)  While under the influence of alcohol or any drug or any combination of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is less safe or unlawful for such person to ignite consumer fireworks as provided for in section 15-32. 
(d)  Any person 18 years of age or older, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on any day at a time not as provided for under divisions (b)(2) and (c)(5) of this section if such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is issued a special use permit pursuant to the law of a governing authority of a county or municipal corporation for the use or ignition of consumer fireworks in a location within the City of Kingsland as provided for under divisions (b)(2) and (c)(5) of this subsection, provided that such special use permit is required for such use or ignition. Such special use permit shall designate the time or times and location that such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use or ignite or cause to be ignited such consumer fireworks. A fee assessed by the City of Kingsland for the issuance of a special use permit pursuant to this subparagraph shall not exceed $100.00. No governing authority or official of the City of Kingsland, or other political subdivision shall bear liability for any decisions made pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Whenever the governor issues a declaration of drought, the governor may, for the boundaries of the area covered by such declaration, enact further regulations and restrictions concerning the use of consumer fireworks than provided for under this section; provided, however, that no such further regulations or restrictions on the use of consumer fireworks shall be effective pursuant to this subparagraph on January 1, July 3, July 4, or December 31 of any year; provided, further, that such further regulations or restrictions shall only apply to the exact boundaries of the area covered by such declaration and shall only apply with regard to the ignition of consumer fireworks; and provided, further, that upon expiration or conclusion of such declaration, such further regulations or restrictions shall be rescinded by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , 7-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Prohibited fireworks activities, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2. 
Sec. 15-32. - Igniting fireworks while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite consumer fireworks or fireworks while: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol or any drug or any combination of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is unsafe for such person to ignite consumer fireworks or fireworks; or 
(2)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this Code section, there is any amount of marijuana or a controlled substance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21, present in such person's blood or urine, or both, including the metabolites and derivatives of each or both, without regard to whether or not any alcohol is present in such person's breath or blood. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this Code section is or has been legally entitled to use a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this Code section; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this Code section unless such person is rendered incapable of igniting consumer fireworks or fireworks safely as a result of using a drug other than alcohol which such person is legally entitled to use. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , 7-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Prohibited fireworks activities while intoxicated, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2.1. 
Secs. 15-33—15-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 15-46. - False alarms. 
No person in the city shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Code 1968, § 7-504(3)) 
State Law reference— Transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; transmitting a false public alarm, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-28; request for ambulance when not reasonably needed, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-29. 
Sec. 15-47. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with this procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1989-7, § 1, 4-24-89) 
State Law reference— Governing body may adopt ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 15-48. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Violations. Any minor violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating subsection (b) of this section shall be charged with such violation and tried in mayor's court, and upon being found guilty shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1968, §§ 7-401—7-403) 
Sec. 15-49. - Discharge of firearms and pellet guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge firearms or pellet guns within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this section shall be charged with such violation and tried in mayor's court, and, upon being found guilty, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the city. 
(c)  This section shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police power of the city, for the preservation and protection of the public safety. 
(d)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Nuisance beaver situations may cause an impoundment threatening downstream property, upstream flooding of land, trees or other vegetation killed by flooding, flooding of homes, flooding of highways, and impairment of drainage systems or landowner distress. 
(2)  When a nuisance beaver situation has been identified, that person shall notify the public works director (PWD) for the city or his/her designee. The PWD or his/her designee will inspect the identified area and render a decision that conditions exists as delineated in paragraph (1). 
(3)  If conditions exist the (PWD) is authorized to remove the beaver by any means necessary including trapping or shooting the nuisance beaver. 
(4)  The (PWD) may at his discretion authorize anyone to discharge a weapon to facilitate the removal of the nuisance beaver. 
(5)  A .22 LR caliber rifle and pellet rifle will be the only authorized firearm. 
(6)  The PWD may authorize such removal of a nuisance beaver upon easements and rights-of-way owned by the city. 
(7)  The PWD and any person authorized by the PWD shall comply with the laws of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. Section 27-3-62. 
(Ord. of 5-12-76, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 2017-10 , 11-13-17) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 
Sec. 15-50. - Carrying pistol without license. 
A person commits the crime of carrying a pistol without a license when he has or carries on or about his person, outside of his home, motor vehicle or place of business, any pistol or revolver without having on his person a valid license issued by the judge of the probate court of the county in which he resides; provided that no permit shall be required for persons with a valid hunting or fishing license on their person or for persons not required by law to have hunting licenses who are engaged in legal hunting, fishing or sport shooting, when the persons have the permission of the owner of the land on which the activities are being conducted. A pistol or revolver, whenever loaded, shall be carried only in an open and fully exposed manner. Upon conviction of the crime of carrying a pistol without a license, the person committing the violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment of not more than three months and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  For the second offense, and for any subsequent offense, he shall be guilty of a felony, and shall be bound over to the superior court for disposition. 
(Ord. No. 1980-2, 3-19-80) 
State Law reference— Carrying pistol without license, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-128. 
Sec. 15-51. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
A person commits the crime of carrying a concealed weapon when he has or carries about his person outside of his home or place of business, unless in an open manner and fully exposed to view, any bludgeon, metal knuckles, firearm, knife designed for offense and defense, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character, except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 16-11-130. 
(Ord. No. 1980-1, 3-19-80) 
State Law reference— Carrying a concealed weapon, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-126. 
Sec. 15-52. - False information. 
No person shall give false information to a police officer of the City of Kingsland in the performance of the officer's official duties with the intent to mislead the officer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-21, 9-22-2008) 
Sec. 15-53. - Synthetic drugs. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the City of Kingsland to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by prohibiting the possession, sale, and manufacture of synthetic drugs as deemed herein which, when consumed, mimic the effects of narcotics or controlled substances. Due to the dangerous medical and health effects the products prohibited by this section can have on the user of the product, each violation shall be considered a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Synthetic drug means synthetic chemical, synthetic chemical compound, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic cathinones, and those substances meeting two or more of the factors described in subsection (c). 
(2)  Synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound refers to a chemical or chemical compound whose molecular composition is substantially similar to, or mimics any of those substances listed as controlled substances in O.C.G.A § 16-13-71, and whose intended use when introduced into the human body is to mimic the effects of a controlled substance. "Substantially similar" to a controlled substance is described as a "controlled substance analog" in 21 USCS § 802 (32) (A). 
(3)  Synthetic cannabinoids means any herbal, vegetal, or liquid material which has been soaked, sprayed, blended, combined or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the herbal, vegetal or liquid material, or the smoke or vapor emitted from its burning, or vaporization, to mimic or simulate the effects of a controlled substance, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), when inhaled, ingested, or otherwise introduced into the human body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. Any herbal, vegetal or liquid posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption," "not for smoking," or other similar statement. The fact that a herbal, vegetal or liquid material, packaged and advertised as a food additive, potpourri, herbal incense, etc., has been soaked, sprayed, blended, combined or otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product may be considered in determining whether the product is considered a synthetic cannabinoid. This term specifically does not include any herbal, vegetal or liquid material containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which: require a prescription; are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration; and are dispensed in accordance with Georgia and Federal law. 
(4)  Synthetic Cathinones, also known as bath salts, means any granular, crystalline, powdered, pill-encapsulated, stick, or block material form of synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the material, or the smoke or vapor emitted from its burning or vaporization, to mimic or simulate the effects of a narcotic or other controlled substance when inhaled, ingested, injected or otherwise introduced into the human body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. Any material described above shall be considered a synthetic drug regardless of the labeling posted on the packaging for the material and regardless of whether the labeling states that its contents are "not for human consumption," "not for smoking," or contains some other similar statement. This term specifically does not include any legitimate, traditional materials known as bath salts or Epsom salts containing synthetic chemicals or chemical compounds which may: 
a.  Require a prescription; 
b.  Are dispensed in accordance with Georgia and Federal law. 
(5)  Controlled substance means any substance defined or listed in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of O.C.G.A. Chapter 13 Article 2, any analogues, isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers, esters and ethers of such substances. 
(6)  Drug means an article or substance that is intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of humans as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-7. 
(7)  Misbranded drug means a drug that violates 21 U.S. Code § 352 including, but not limited, to drugs for which (a) the label is in any way false or misleading; (b) the label does not bear the name and place of business of the manufacturer, repackager, or distributor of the finished form of the drug; (c) the label does not bear adequate directions for use; or (d) the label does not bear adequate warnings against use. 
(8)  Drug paraphernalia or drug related object means other than devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, any object used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing illicit drugs or controlled substances into the human body. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court may consider any of the factors enumerated in 21 U.S. Code § 863. 
(c)  Determination of a substance as a synthetic drug. The following factors, taken in the totality of the circumstances, may be considered in determining whether a product, substance, or other material, should be classified as a synthetic drug. For the purposes of enforcement of this section, the establishment of two or more of these factors shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a synthetic drug. 
(1)  Marketing: The substance is advertised to be a product for which it is rarely, if ever, suitable to be used for (such as, but not limited to, incense, potpourri, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, communication device screen cleaner, jewelry cleaner, glass cleaner). 
(2)  Sales location: Products, whether displayed or not, but offered or sold in, or through, businesses such as liquor stores, smoke shops, and gas/convenience stores where such products are not typically sold. 
(3)  Labels and packaging: 
a.  Products marketed as common non-consumable products which contain warnings not normally found on such products. The warnings may be similar, but not limited to, "not for human consumption", "not for purchase by minors"; or 
b.  Products containing notices on the package not normally found on similar products such as, but not limited to, "does not contain any chemical compounds prohibited by State law," "contains no prohibited chemicals," "product is in accordance with State and Federal laws," "product is in compliance with 2011-2012 Georgia Senate Bill 370 AP," "does not contain AM 2201 (1-[(5-Fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(naphthalen-1-yl)methanone) or any DEA banned substance", "legal herbal substance," "aromatherapy only, "legal in 50 States," "100% compliant guaranteed". 
c.  Products whose package labeling or design suggests the user will achieve a "high", euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement, or that the product has other drug-like effects on the body or otherwise affects the function of the human body. 
d.  Products using brand names and packaging designed to make the product appear similar to illicit street drugs or commonly used street slang for illicit drugs or their effects or employs symbols, terms, or effects of illegal drugs, such as marijuana leaf, blunts, red eyes, or crossed-out eyes. 
e.  Packages are misleading, deceptive or misbranded, including but not limited to: 
i.  The label is in any way false or misleading; 
ii.  The label does not bear the name and place of business of the manufacturer, re-packager, or distributor of the finished form of the drug; 
iii.  The label does not bear adequate directions for use; or 
iv.  The label does not bear adequate warnings against use and/or the product contains contradictory warnings/directions for the product's use, which is not consistent for the type of product advertised. 
(Example: "For fragrance or aromatherapy only" which requires human inhalation and/or "blueberry flavor, upon packages that also read "not for human consumption" or similar statements.) 
(4)  P rice: The price of the product is incongruent with other similar products marketed for legitimate use, such as incense, potpourri, food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, communication device screen cleaner, jewelry cleaner, glass cleaner. 
(5)  Similarity to illicit street drugs: Products designed to make the substance appear similar to illicit street drugs (such as, but not limited to, a white powder made to resemble, in color and texture, cocaine, or dried vegetal material resembling marijuana). 
(6)  Ingredients: A product which is, or has been enhanced with, a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product but mimics the effects of a controlled substance when the product, or the smoke or vapor from the burned or vaporized product, is introduced into the human body. 
(7)  Verbal or written representations: Verbal or written representations made at the place of sale or display regarding the purpose, methods, use, or effect of the product on the human body. 
(8)  Co-sale: Offers or suggestions to purchase products such as cigars, pipes, cigarette papers, or e-cigarettes that are used with synthetic drugs and demonstrate intent for human consumption. 
(9)  Subterfuge: Use of passwords, signs, vouching, or other means to vet purchasers and hiding product from general view or offsite to evade law enforcement as to the product's presence 
(d)  Prohibited acts. The following are prohibited within the city: 
(1)  The possession with intent to sell, sale, distribution, production, or manufacture of synthetic drugs. 
(2)  The display for sale, marketing, advertisement or other offer for sale or trade of synthetic drugs in retail stores. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing the drug related nature of the object, to sell, lend, rent, lease, give, exchange, or otherwise distribute to any person any drug related object. It shall also be unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing the drug related nature of the object, to display for sale, or possess with the intent to distribute any drug related object. Unless stated within the body of the advertisement or notice that the object that is advertised or about which information is disseminated is not available for distribution of any sort in this state, it shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, knowing the drug related nature of the object, to distribute or disseminate in any manner to any person any advertisement of any kind or notice of any kind which gives information, directly or indirectly, on where, how, from whom, or by what means any drug related object may be obtained or made. 
(e)  Laboratory analysis. The city may utilize laboratory analysis or expert testimony (chemistry and/or pharmacology) to test suspected synthetic drugs. Any laboratory analysis of suspected synthetic drug shall be conducted by an ISO certified laboratory, competent to provide expert testimony in a court of law as to the chemical contents of the product. 
(f)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article shall be with any law enforcement officer. Any products found to be synthetic drugs possessed in violation of this section may be seized and held by the city as evidence to be used in any further proceeding. 
(2)  This section is administratively enforceable against any person or legal entity. For the purposes of administrative enforcement, law enforcement officers are specifically authorized and designated to enforce this article within the city limits to the extent such authorization/designation is required by law. 
(3)  Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, which can be prosecuted separately. For the purposes of administrative enforcement of this section, each package containing a synthetic drug or misbranded drug shall be considered a separate code violation. In any order finding a violation of this section, the violator shall be ordered to pay, in addition to the penalty, for any laboratory analysis and expert testimony costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from taking such other action in law or equity as may be necessary to remedy any violation of, or refusal to comply with, any part of this article including but not limited to: 
a.  Pursuit of injunctive and/or declaratory relief in a court of competent jurisdiction; 
b.  Initiating an action to recover any and all damages that may result from a violation of, or a refusal to comply with, any part of this section; or 
c.  Utilizing any other action or enforcement method allowable by law. 
(5)  Civil penalties. 
a.  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00, state law permitting, per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling, laboratory testing, and witness testimonial expenses. 
b.  The city shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires, 
(6)  Criminal prosecution. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
( Ord. No. 2015-14, 6-22-2015 ) 
Sec. 15-54. - Marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the City of Kingsland. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $150.00. Where the court finds that a defendant is without the financial means to pay a fine, the court may direct the defendant to perform community service commensurate with the fine that would otherwise be imposed. In no event shall any person convicted of marijuana possession pursuant to this section be punished by imprisonment for any term. Any defendant charged hereunder with possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be entitled on request to have the case against the defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in Camden County. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10 , 9-24-2018) 
State Law reference— Offenses relating to marijuana, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30 et seq. 
Secs. 15-55—15-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 15-71. - Damaging property generally. 
No person in the city shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to the city or any person in the city. 
(Code 1968, § 7-506(1)(a)) 
Sec. 15-72. - Tampering with city property. 
No person in the city shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fireplug, topographical survey monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 7-506(2)(a)) 
Sec. 15-73. - Removal of earth from public property. 
No person in the city shall move, disturb or take any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground. 
(Code 1968, § 7-506(2)(c)) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving theft, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 15-74. - Obstructing passageway. 
No person in the city shall place or erect upon any public way or passageway to any building an obstruction of any type, provided that this section shall not prevent the duly authorized or required placing of temporary barriers or warning signs for the purpose of safeguarding the public. 
(Code 1968, § 7-506(2)(b)) 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 10-11-43. 
Sec. 15-75. - Unlawful occupancy. 
Any person wandering and occupying, lodging or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other vehicle, without owning the structure or vehicle or without permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of the structure or vehicle, or sleeping in any vacant lot during the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of himself, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 7-503(5)(d)) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 15-76. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the merchandise or with the intent to deprive the owner of the possession thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; or 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise. 
(b)  A person convicted of the crime of theft by shoplifting as provided in this section, when the property which was the subject of the theft is $100.00 or less in value, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1979-3, § 1, 9-12-79) 
State Law reference— Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Secs. 15-77—15-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Obscenity and related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq. 

Sec. 15-96. - Use of vulgar language in public place. 
No person in the city shall use vulgar, profane or indecent language on any public street or other public place or in any public dancehall, club dance, skating rink or place of business open to public patronage. 
(Code 1968, § 7-507(1)) 
Sec. 15-97. - Window peeping. 
No person in the city shall look, peer or peep into, or be found loitering around or within view of, any window not on his own property, with the intent of watching or looking through the window. 
(Code 1968, § 7-507(3)) 
State Law reference— Peeping toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61. 
Sec. 15-98. - Operation of adult bookstore or adult theatre; sale of sex paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore or shop or a triple-X rated movie house; to conduct live sex shows; or to sell any type of sex manipulation paraphernalia, including but not limited to books, magazines or literature. 
State Law reference— Restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 15-99. - Indecent or immoral shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any vulgar, indecent or immoral show, theatrical, opera or concert. It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any ballroom, opera house or other house where exhibits may be had to permit any vulgar or immoral show, theatrical, opera or concert to exhibit therein. 
Sec. 15-100. - Nudity generally; nude dancing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit, and no license shall issue, for any nude, topless or bottomless dancing, exhibition or serving in a place in the city to which the public has access. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person displaying the nude body, regardless of whether female or male, to dance or otherwise perform as an entertainer in any public place or business establishment. As a means of clarification, no female shall publicly display the nipples of the breast, and no male or female shall allow to be exposed any private sex parts of the body, including the pubic hairs. 
Sec. 15-101. - Display or distribution of obscene material. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person to put on display for sale any pictures, magazines, papers, books or other reading material that: 
(1)  Has nude or partially nude bodies; 
(2)  Has suggestive sexual enticements or sexual perversity; or 
(3)  Suggests or describes any unwholesome sexual relations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to import, print, publish, exhibit, display, sell or distribute any book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, stereopticon, moving picture, slide or film or other thing containing obscene language or any obscene prints, figures, pictures or descriptions manifestly tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, or introduce into any family, school or place of education, or buy, procure, receive or have in his possession, any book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, stereopticon, slide or moving picture film or other thing, either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation, or with intent to introduce such material into any family, school or place of education or any place of public amusement. 
State Law reference— Distribution of obscene materials, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
Secs. 15-102—15-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of electronic alarm systems by county or municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; license required to engage in low voltage alarm system contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1. 

Sec. 15-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Kingsland Alarm Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-23-92, § 1) 
Sec. 15-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm contractor means any person or vendor who installs, maintains, repairs, alters, monitors or services alarm systems for compensation. An alarm contractor shall possess a current and appropriate occupational license from the city and county, an alarm contractor's registration certificate issued by the police department and, where applicable, shall meet the requirements for an alarm system contractor pursuant to state statutes. Alarm contractors shall maintain a 24-hour emergency telephone number and shall be capable of responding to an emergency service call within four hours. 
Alarm protocol means a confidential systematic program, as determined by the police department, to verify or otherwise confirm the validity of an alarm signal at a banking or other financial institution or any other business or service facility where deemed appropriate by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
Alarm signal means the audible sound or a transmission of a signal or a message as the result of the activation of an alarm system or an audible alarm. 
Alarm system means any mechanical, electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed to be used for the detection of smoke or fire or of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of the possible commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, which emits a sound or transmits a signal and/or message when activated. Alarm systems include direct dial telephone devices, audible, silent, fire and panic alarms and proprietor alarms. Excluded from the definition of alarm systems are devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility; or auxiliary devices installed by municipal utilities or telephone companies to protect utility systems from damage or disruption of services; or audible alarms that are affixed to motor vehicles. If an alarm system is designed to activate an audible alarm, the alarm system shall be designed so as to automatically deactivate the audible alarm after no more than 30 minutes of operation. 
Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of fire or smoke or of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound when it is activated. 
Commercial premises means any structure or area which is not defined herein as a residential premises. 
False alarm means an alarm signal which is responded to by the police department, the fire department or emergency medical services of the city or county, and which is caused by other than an emergency situation, or which is not caused by the activation of either an alarm system or audible alarm as the result of fire or smoke, a burglary, robbery, assault, forced entry or attempted forced entry into the premises protected by such alarm. An alarm will be deemed to be a false alarm when there is no substantial physical evidence which would clearly indicate that smoke, fire or a criminal act was the sole reason for activation of the alarm signal or when the alarm system was intentionally activated by an individual under circumstances where there was no articulable and reasonable basis to believe that a fire, crime or other emergency, warranting immediate response by the appropriate authorities, had occurred or was occurring, or was about to occur. The failure to abide by the established, current, alarm protocol by those responsible on the premises will be considered a separate false alarm under this definition. 
Notice means written notice, given either by mail or by personal service upon the addressee. 
Residential premises means any structure or combination of structures which serve as dwelling units, including single-family as well as multifamily units. 
(Ord. of 11-23-92, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-203. - Posting of premises; deactivation of alarm system. 
(a)  It is unlawful to maintain on any commercial or residential premises an alarm or audible alarm unless there is posted at the main entrance to the premises the decal required by this article, which decal shall indicate current information on file with the police department of the telephone numbers of at least two persons who can be reached at all times; and a prominent, conspicuous notice of an alarm company contractor's central office or representative that can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system, or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if the alarm company contractor has no means of access to the premises. 
(b)  If any such person or representative shall fail to appear to turn off an alarm within 30 minutes after being notified by the police department to do so, then the alarm contractor and owner or manager of the premises shall be in violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided by this article. 
(c)  All alarm systems shall have a 30-minute cutoff switch installed. Failure to install a cutoff switch constitutes a false alarm and, furthermore, a violation of this article and may result in decal revocation or criminal charges. 
(Ord. of 11-23-92, § 3) 
Sec. 15-204. - Required reports of false alarms; corrective actions; penalties. 
(a)  Responsibility for all false alarms under this article shall be borne by the person or persons occupying or controlling the premises. For each response by the police department to any false alarm, the person owning or maintaining such alarm system shall submit such reports as are set forth in this article or be in violation of this article as follows: 
(1)  For any six responses recorded by the police department during any 12-month period to a premises where a false alarm has occurred, no violation of this article shall be deemed to exist; however, the person having or maintaining the burglary or robbery alarm or the alarm protocol shall, within ten working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the chief of police setting forth in writing the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether the alarm system has been inspected by an authorized service person, and such other information as the chief of police may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary. 
(2)  Each and every false alarm over six and up through 12 which requires a response to a premises, during any 12-month period, where there have already occurred six responses during the same period, shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this article and the violator shall be punished by a minimum fine of $50.00. 
(3)  False alarm violation number 13 within a 12-month period shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $100.00, plus the immediate revocation of the decal issued for the alarm system. In order for the alarm system to be reregistered and reactivated, the alarm system shall be serviced by an alarm contractor or the person who is in charge of the alarm system, inspected and certified to the satisfaction of a designated representative of the chief of police, and the decal reissued at a reissuance fee of $50.00. 
(b)  Use of a nonregistered alarm system by any person is unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $100.00. 
(c)  Within 15 working days after a false alarm violation has been committed, the police department shall notify the decal holder of the alarm system from which such false alarm emanated that the false alarm violation has occurred and the steps necessary to answer the charge. Any person who fails to appear to answer such charge, or to pay a fine levied by the municipal court concerning such charge, is subject to having the decal revoked for the alarm system. 
(d)  Failure of the police department to mail or serve the notice provided for in this article shall preclude the assessment of a false alarm violation; however, such violation shall still be considered as a violation for the purposes of calculating the number of false alarm violations necessary to warrant revocation of the alarm system decal. 
(Ord. of 11-23-92, § 4) 
Chapter 16 - POLICE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; officers and employees generally, § 2-66 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 7; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day; police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1; torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 

Sec. 16-1. - False report of crime. 
No person in the city shall make to or file with the police department of the city any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 7-504(4)) 
State Law reference— Stirring up of groundless actions; encouraging legal proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-95. 
Sec. 16-2. - Resisting or interfering with officer. 
No person in the city shall resist any police officer, any member of the police department or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1968, § 7-504(5)(a)) 
State Law reference— Hindering or obstructing law enforcement officers, resisting arrest, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24. 
Sec. 16-3. - Escape from jail. 
No person in the city shall, while a prisoner in the city jail or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or while otherwise in custody of and confined by the city, escape or attempt to escape or assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(Code 1968, § 7-504(5)(b)) 
State Law reference— Escape, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-52; aiding or permitting escape, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-53. 
Chapter 17 - SOIL EROSION CONTROL AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; adoption of standard excavation and grading code, § 5-1(3); flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; solid waste management, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1—17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, Art. II, §§ 17-26—17-35 have been removed as similar provisions can be found in Appendix A, §§ 180—189. Former Art. II pertained to soil erosion, sedimentation and polution control and derived from Ord. No. 2012-04, adopted June 11, 2012; Ord. No. 1989-11, adopted November 13, 1989 and Ord. No. 2000-15, adopted November 27, 2000. 

Secs. 17-26—17-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER RUNOFF AND RETENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-07, adopted Sept. 27, 2010 stated "An ordinance to adopt by reference the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. Whereas Kingsland has adopted and is enforcing a Public Works Policies and Specification Manual; and whereas this manual was last updated on September 22, 2008; and whereas the Camden County Drainage Study, Engineering Handbook referred to therein in Section IV does not contain the currently recognized Best Management Practices; now therefore be it ordained by the mayor and council of the City of Kingsland that henceforth, the City adopts and will abide by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as it currently exists and may be modified and also adopts and will abide by the Coastal Stormwater Supplement — First Edition, April 2009 as it currently exists and may be modified except wherein the standards in the Public Works Policies and Specification Manual set a higher standard." 

Sec. 17-56. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the development of unimproved land or the alteration of previously improved land as that development or alteration affects the retention 
of stormwater or irrigation water on the site. In addition, this section addresses the effects of developments or alterations on soil erosion and water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § A, 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-57. - Control of runoff required; information to be included on site plan. 
(a)  All land filling and regrading projects must not alter existing drainage flows to a point that would create an adverse effect on abutting properties. All new land development must include a design for swales for adequate control of stormwater. Land filling and grading projects may be allowed as subsidiary developments. Such projects may also be considered along with site plan review procedures. An applicant shall provide topographic information concerning the site of a proposed development indicating the existing direction of storm runoff and the existence of any ditches, canals, streams or storm sewers within or directly adjacent to the land to be developed. 
(b)  Any development or redevelopment of land shall not result in shedding more stormwater into adjacent rights-of-way or property than was discharged by the site in its natural unimproved or existing state. The development shall not allow erosion to effect any damage to adjacent areas. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(1), (2), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-58. - Authority to require additional information. 
Additional substantiating information, including but not limited to an inflow-outflow hydrograph, may be required at the discretion of the city engineer in order to verify the adequacy of retention design under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(8), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-59. - Additional reviews and permits. 
Additional reviews and permits for proposed drainage improvements may be required of other agencies as directed by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(7), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-60. - Approved methods of water retention. 
Approved methods of water retention are as follows: 
(1)  Retention pond. The surface area, depth, bank slopes (minimum 4:1) and outfall shall be designed according to site requirements and existing engineering department standards. Ponds with standing water shall have a static water depth of six feet. Where a sidewalk or public right-of-way is immediately adjacent to a retention pond, a guardrail or other protective device shall be installed along the sidewalk or right-of-way. Such device shall be required only where the retention pond and sidewalk or right-of-way are abutting. 
(2)  Grass, loose rock, turf block paving or landscaped absorption areas. Surface area, configuration and type shall be designed according to site requirements and shall be subject to engineering department review and approval. A percolation test furnished by a testing laboratory shall be required to verify ground absorption capabilities. 
(3)  Subsurface drain or percolation field with an outfall to a public drainage system. The length, size and depth of drainpipe, size and type of filter material and location of field shall be designed according to site requirements, and shall be subject to engineering department review and approval. A percolation test furnished by a testing laboratory shall be required to verify ground absorption capabilities. 
(4)  Parking areas designed with restrictive stormwater inlets or restrictive pipe sizes. Parking areas shall be designed with a sufficient retention area that, when used in conjunction with a restrictive storm sewer system, shall control the rate of water runoff to conform with city requirements. 
(5)  Roof retention. In some cases the proposed building design could allow for a certain amount of water retention or storage on the roof area. 
(6)  Driveway areas designed with inverted crowns and perimeter swales with an outfall to a public drainage facility. 
(7)  Underground vaults with an outfall to a public drainage facility. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(3), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-61. - Calculation of stormwater runoff. 
(a)  The rational method of analysis shall be used in the design of stormwater systems and shall be the basis of determining size of storage areas. The rational formula is: 
Q = CIA 
In which: 

 
(b)  Minimum rainfall intensity shall use a 25-year storm 60-minute duration. Intensity of rainfall shall not be less than 3.6 inches per hour. 
(c)  Values for the coefficient of runoff (C) are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(4), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-62. - Use of stored water for irrigation. 
Where a development has drainage lakes or ponds as part of the stormwater retention system, these water areas shall be incorporated in the internal irrigation system, to be drawn on when sufficient stored water is available. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(5), 4-14-86) 
Sec. 17-63. - Developments draining into tidal waters. 
The retention requirement of this article offers a method of controlling water quality via the removal of harmful sediments and the like. Therefore, those developments draining directly into tidal waters must also comply with the retention requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1986-17, § B(6), 4-14-86) 
Chapter 18 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, Ch. 9; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; soil erosion and stormwater management, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Approved solid waste receptacle means a garbage or refuse container approved by the director of public works or his agent. Different types of containers may be required for different customer classes. 
Customer means a person, occupant, owner, residence, business, industry or any other establishment being served by the city under this chapter. 
Customer class means the classification or group to which a customer is assigned according to location, frequency of pickup, volume of refuse and type of refuse. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. This also includes tin cans, paper and plastic products and miscellaneous waste products normal to a household or small business or office. 
Hazardous waste means materials that can start fires, that can react or explode singularly when mixed with other materials, or that are corrosive or toxic. 
Junk means units or pieces of discarded units of metal, plastic, glass or rubber, including but not limited to appliances, motor vehicles, furniture or other large discarded objects too bulky or too heavy to be placed in an approved receptacle. 
Refuse means all putrescible or nonputrescible waste, except sewage or body wastes, including but not limited to garbage, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles or household goods, and solid market and industrial waste, junk, trash and rubbish. 
Refuse disposal area means a disposal area approved and permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, including but not limited to paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood (no trees), glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Trash means yard and street rubbish. 
Unauthorized accumulation of refuse means refuse which is stored or accumulated on any premises in the city in such a manner as to create unsanitary conditions, create fire hazards, cause offensive and obnoxious odors, provide a breeding place for insects or harboring place for vermin, invite plundering, endanger the safety of children or adults, reduce property values or in any way adversely affect the health, safety, welfare and well-being of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 1, 12-4-87) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided by this Code or by the Code of the State of Georgia. Failure to remedy a violation as notified may result in each successive day being a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 3(4), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-3. - Inspections; correction of violations. 
The director of public works may appoint solid waste supervisors who shall have the authority, and whose duty it shall be, to make routine inspections of garbage cans, containers and solid waste collection areas, and determine their serviceability and condition. The supervisor or the director of public works shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises, informing the owner or occupant of an unacceptable condition and specifying the condition. The owner or occupant shall be given a reasonable time to correct the condition specified in the notice. Upon failure to correct the condition, the director or the supervisor shall have the duty of issuing a summons directing the responsible party to appear in the city court to answer the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 3(2), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-4. - Burning permit. 
Burning of refuse, building materials, brush, land clearing residue or any other waste materials, except in an approved incinerator or heating device, is prohibited unless a special permit has been obtained from the fire chief's office authorizing the burning. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 3(3), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-5. - City collection service; materials not collected by city. 
(a)  Collection generally. All solid waste accumulated in the city will be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized in this chapter. The director of public works or his agent is authorized, with the approval of the city council, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations concerning solid waste collection, conveyance and disposal. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, and shall be supplementary to any provision of this chapter, but not contrary thereto. 
(b)  Collection schedule. The city will collect solid waste in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the solid waste division of the department of public works and at city hall. Every effort will be made to notify citizens of changes of schedules. 
(c)  Collection of dead animals. Dead animals such as dogs, house pets and small wild animals will be picked up by the city. 
(d)  Disposal of hazardous materials. Hazardous materials such as acid, explosive materials, flammable liquids and dangerous or corrosive materials of any kind will not be collected. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to place any such item, product or material in any refuse can or container for collection by the city. State and federal hazardous waste laws shall be in effect, and any violations shall be reported to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
(e)  Removal of construction debris. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, broken concrete, brickbats, rock or debris resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction. The owner of the premises, or the contractor, builder or person doing the repairs, remodeling or construction, shall be required to haul away and legally dispose of all such debris, including stumps, trees and limbs. 
(f)  Removal of branches, cuttings, etc., cut by commercial contractors. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, stumps, bushes or other vegetation resulting from the actions of commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors. When a tree is cut from private property by any person, the party responsible for cutting the tree shall remove from the property and legally dispose of all wood and limbs. 
(g)  Collection of branches, cuttings, etc., cut by homeowner. Tree trimmings and shrubbery cuttings resulting from the direct actions of a property owner, to be classified as trash and collected by the city, must be cut into lengths of six feet or less and be a maximum of five inches in diameter. Such trash must be placed in an orderly manner so that it can be readily handled. 
(h)  Deposit of ashes. It shall be unlawful to deposit hot or cold ashes, clinkers, etc., in any refuse container or on streets, sidewalks or any public property. 
(i)  Bagging of pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(1), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-6. - Charges for collection by city. 
(a)  A solid waste service charge shall be made to customers for collection services outlined in this chapter. These charges will be made and collected where the service is available, unless service is performed by a contractor under a permit from the director of public works. Each residential unit and each business establishment in the city is required to have solid waste collection services provided by the city or a state-certified hauler. Fees shall be billed monthly along with charges for other city utility services and shall be due and payable as provided by this Code. 
(b)  Collection services and water and sewer services shall be discontinued by the city for nonpayment of solid waste charges and fees as set by the city council. Failure to pay fees provided for in this section is a violation of this Code, and the person failing to pay the fees shall be charged for such violation. 
(c)  If any person liable for any amount under this chapter sells his property, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient sum from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city treasurer showing that he has paid the amount, or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  For the purpose of fees due the city for its services in collecting solid waste under the provisions of this chapter, customer classes and the fee for each customer class are to be established by the chief administrative officer from time to time as authorized by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(4), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-7. - Containers; placement for collection. 
(a)  Approval required. All containers and container locations for any type of refuse must be approved by the director of public works of the city. 
(b)  Wheeled garbage containers. 
(1)  The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee occupying any building, house or structure within the city occupied as a residence or business using an approved wheeled garbage container shall have the container placed at an agreed curb location no later than 7:00 a.m. and removed from the curb by 7:00 p.m. on the days designated by the city's director of public works or his agent. The only exception to this requirement shall be for persons with physical handicaps, the elderly or those otherwise disabled where there is no resident or occupant living on the premises who is physically capable of placing the container at the location established by the city's director of public works or his agent. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in the issuance of a citation by authorized city personnel. The first citation shall result in a written warning. Persons receiving second and subsequent citations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the city court shall be punished according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Wheeled garbage containers furnished by the city shall not be removed from the premises to which they are delivered, and it shall be the duty of the occupant of the premises, if the dwelling is to be vacated by the occupant, to notify the solid waste division at least three days prior to vacancy. 
(3)  If the wheeled garbage container furnished by the city is damaged, lost or destroyed through negligence of the person to whom the container was assigned, the person shall reimburse the city for the cost of a replacement container. 
(4)  All containers must be kept clean by the customer. 
(5)  The mayor and council may, by resolution, authorize the chief administrative officer to make volume purchases of approved refuse containers for use by city refuse customers and to recover the cost of the containers by a monthly fee set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(3), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-8. - Transport of waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport his own solid waste, or with a permit to transport the solid waste of another, over the streets of the city when the material transported is inadequately secured, allowing any of the material to fall, leak or be blown from the vehicle. The operator of the offending vehicle shall be processed through the city court. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(2)(a), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-9. - Container or compactor services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a container or compactor service in the city unless authorized to do so by resolution of the mayor and council, which resolution shall set forth all terms and conditions which are in addition to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(2)(b), 12-4-87) 
Sec. 18-10. - Unlawful dumping; sanitary landfills. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush, building debris or roofing material, or parts thereof, anywhere in the incorporated area of the city, except as may be permitted by city ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped or buried on any private property any of the solid waste or refuse described in subsection (a) of this section without first obtaining the written permission of the owner of such property and without complying with the state Solid Waste Act of 1973. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property, with the owner's permission, of sand, dirt, broken bricks, blocks or broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided the property is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment, and to cover it with dirt, upon direction of the city council. 
(d)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, been sent to or received by or been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, such identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(e)  No sanitary landfill shall be operated within the city without written approval of the city council and a state permit. 
(Ord. No. 1987-19, § 4(2)(c)—(g), 12-4-87) 
Secs. 18-11—18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 18-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means: 
(1)  The right-of-way of any road or highway; 
(2)  Any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; 
(3)  Any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; and 
(4)  Residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(Ord. No. 1985-10, 5-13-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-37. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,200.00; and 
(2)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article of the Kingsland Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1985-10, 5-13-85; Ord. No. 2004-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 18-38. - Deposit of litter prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1985-10, 5-13-85) 
Chapter 19 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-4(15); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; solid waste management, Ch. 18; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Obstructions by storage of merchandise, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall use any sidewalk, street, alley or public place for the storage of personal property, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind; nor shall any person place or cause to be placed in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place any barrel, box, crate, package or other obstruction of any kind, or permit the same to remain thereon longer than is necessary to convey such article to or from the premises abutting on such sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01 , 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 19-2. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, storing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by a sudden emergency, and in such emergency such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  For displaying advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01 , 2-22-2016) 
Sec. 19-3. - Continuous parking in same location. 
Any vehicle that shall remain parked continuously in the same location on any street in the city for the period of 72 hours or more shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01 , 2-22-2016) 
Secs. 19-4—19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-26. - Title of article. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Parade Ordinance of the City of Kingsland. 
(Code 1968, § 10-301) 
Sec. 19-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city, whether on foot, mounted or in vehicles. 
Parade permit means the permit required by this article. 
(Code 1968, § 10-302) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-28. - Exceptions to article. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1968, § 10-303(1)) 
Sec. 19-29. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be charged with such violation and tried in mayor's court, and, upon being found guilty, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 10-314) 
Sec. 19-30. - Enforcement of article. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 10-317) 
Sec. 19-31. - Interference with parade. 
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Code 1968, § 10-312(1)) 
Sec. 19-32. - Driving through parade. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons composing a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Code 1968, § 10-312(2)) 
Sec. 19-33. - Parking on parade route. 
The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on an unposted street in violation of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 10-312(3)) 
Secs. 19-34—19-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 19-51. - Required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the chief of police or the city council as provided in this division. 
(Code 1968, § 10-303) 
Sec. 19-52. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than seven days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
f.  The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles. 
g.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly areas. 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
l.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee as set out in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1968, § 10-304) 
Sec. 19-53. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(4)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(7)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1968, § 10-305) 
Sec. 19-54. - Notice of denial. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1968, § 10-306) 
Sec. 19-55. - Appeal of denial. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within four days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt, by special meeting if a regular meeting is not to be held within ten days from the date of such appeal. 
(Code 1968, § 10-307) 
Sec. 19-56. - Alternate permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within four days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1968, § 10-308) 
Sec. 19-57. - Notice to city officials of issuance of permit. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor. 
(2)  The mayor pro tempore. 
(3)  The city attorney. 
(4)  The fire chief. 
(Code 1968, § 10-309) 
Sec. 19-58. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 10-310) 
Sec. 19-59. - Duties of permittee; possession of permit during parade. 
(a)  A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1968, § 10-311) 
Sec. 19-60. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1968, § 10-313) 
Chapter 20 - TAXATION AND REVENUE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-4(14); administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES AND TAXES ON INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-04, §§ 1—12, adopted Jan. 13, 2003 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions were codified as superseding former Art. II, §§ 20-26—20-31 which pertained to fees and taxes on insurers and derived from Ord. No. 1983-4, §§ 1—6, adopted Oct. 26, 1983; Ord. No. 1989-1A, §§ 1—6, adopted Jan. 23, 1989; Ord. of Dec. 10, 1990, §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 1994-7, §§ 1—6, adopted Sept. 12, 1994; Ord. No. 2001-29, §§ 1—5, adopted Oct. 22, 2001. 

Sec. 20-26. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2004 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 20-27, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2001-29, § 1, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 20-27. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional administrative fee of $26.25 for the year 2004 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-29, § 2, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 2, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 20-28. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2004 and for each thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-26 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-29, § 3, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 3, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 20-29. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2004 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-26 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-29, § 4, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 4, 2-10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 3-10-2003) 
Sec. 20-30. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 20-26 and 20-27 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2004 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-29, § 5, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 5, 2-10-2003) 
Secs. 20-31—20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 20-51. - Levy of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. For purposes of this section, gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 1983-3, § 1, 10-26-83) 
Sec. 20-52. - Due date; filing of returns. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1983-3, § 2, 10-26-83) 
Secs. 20-53—20-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LODGING OCCUPANCY EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-02, adopted Feb. 24, 2014, amended this Art. IV, excise tax on lodging, in its entirety, to comply with changes in state occupancy tax law HB1168 signed by Gov. Perdue on May 14, 2008 as it pertains to defining lodging facilities and tourist stays. In effect this ordinance repeals the former provisions and enacts similar new provisions as herein set out. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-04, §§ 1—12, adopted Jan. 13, 2003, amended the former Art. IV, §§ 20-60—20-70, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1994-3, §§ 1—11, adopted Mar. 28, 1994. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1994-3, adopted Mar. 28, 1994, amended this Art. IV, excise tax on lodging, in its entirety, in effect repealing the former provisions and enacting similar new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, the article consisted of § 20-60 and derived from Ord. No. 1984-3, adopted Apr. 9, 1984; Ord. No. 1987-8, adopted June 11, 1987; and Ord. No. 1991-2, adopted July 8, 1991. Related laws reference—Funding of conventions and visitors' bureau authority, Art. II, § 10. 

Sec. 20-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Kingsland and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the City of Kingsland is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4), et seq. 
City finance director means the duly appointed City Finance Director of the City of Kingsland or his designee. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the lodging facility. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a lodging facility that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Lodging space means a room, quarters or space occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Lodging facility means any structure or any portion of a structure furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay business or occupancy taxes to the municipality for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value to the public. Value may be paid in rent, money, goods, labor, or otherwise. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a lodging facility in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such lodging facility; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use of position of any guest quarter or apartment in a lodging facility or the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any space in a lodging facility under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a lodging facility for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(a)(4), et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-61. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a lodging space in a lodging facility in the city a tax at the rate of six percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 20-63. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-62. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting lodging space in this city shall collect a tax of six percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 20-63. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 3, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 3, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-63. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant of any lodging space in a lodging facility on the rent paid for day 31 and thereafter of continuous occupancy. That is, after the occupant has become a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or for use by Georgia state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a Georgia state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 4, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 4, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-64. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in this city shall immediately register with the city finance director on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 5, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 5, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-65. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city finance director monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city finance director. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period and such other information as may be required by the city finance director. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 6, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 6, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-66. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 20-65. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city finance director shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, which ever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 7. 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 7, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-67. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 20-66(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 20-65. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 8, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 8, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-68. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 9, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 9, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-69. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city finance director. The city finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc; form. Every lodging provider renting guest quarters in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city finance director may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest quarters and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest quarters which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 10, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 10, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-70. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 20-62 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 20-65, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 11, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 11, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-71. - Effective date. 
This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective on the first day of the second month following its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 12, 1-13-2003; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 12, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Sec. 20-72. - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of this tax will be expended as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4), et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2007-06, § 13, 4-9-2007; Ord. No. 2014-02, 2-24-2014) 
Secs. 20-73—20-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAX ON LIQUOR BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 20-76. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein except when the context clearly indicates a contrary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
City means the City of Kingsland. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Licensee means any person holding a liquor pouring license from the city. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Tax means the sales tax on liquor by the drink imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 1, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-77. - Imposition; rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 2, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-78. - Collection by licensee. 
Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink at his pouring outlet. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 3, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-79. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city finance director monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of taxes when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the city finance director showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city finance director. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," as now and hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 4, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-80. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city finance director shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice shall be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 5, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-81. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into possession of the city finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 20-80(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 6, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-82. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city finance director. If the licensee or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city finance director, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 7, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-83. - Administration; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city finance director. The city finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the city finance director may prescribe and in such form as he may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administering the provisions of this article, the city finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the city finance director when required by such official and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collected thereon, or such other information as the city finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 8, 2-14-94) 
Sec. 20-84. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish a return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city finance director or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 1994-2, § 9, 2-14-94) 
Chapter 21 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A traffic schedule, compiled and published by the city, is on file in the city clerk's office where it is available for reference and review. The traffic schedule provides for the following: 
(1) Designates the location of traffic control devices; 
(2) Designates areas or zones where regulations are applied to parking, loading, bus stops or taxicab stands; 
(3) Establishes speed limits; 
(4) Restricts or regulates traffic at certain times on certain streets or to certain types, weights or sizes of vehicles; 
(5) Designates the location of through streets, stop intersections, yield-right-of-way intersections, waiting lanes, one-way streets or truck traffic routes; and 
(6) Establishes regulations upon vehicle turns at designated locations. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 7; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; mobile homes, Ch. 12; vehicles for hire, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 to 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city, with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 10-30-74) 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF LOW SPEED MOTOR VEHICLES (LSMV) AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS 

Sec. 21-2. - Short title. 
This section shall be known as the "Kingsland Low Speed Motor Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-3. - Definitions. 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Driver S license means any license to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of the State of Georgia or any other state. 
Low speed motor vehicle (LSMV) means those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly called "golf carts" which when operated, are incapable of being operated at speeds in excess of 20 miles per hour and have at least three or more wheels. Low speed motor vehicle shall also mean any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low- speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571 .500 and in effect January 1, 200 1. 
Operator means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Owner means a person, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in or lien by another person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as a security except as otherwise specifically provided in this title. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-4. - License required. 
Those persons who are 15 years of age, but not yet 16 years of age may drive a LSMV on the streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic of the city provided he or she has in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-4, as may be amended, and has not had his or her instructional permit suspended or revoked, and if he or she shall is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-5. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  All operators of LSMV's shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular trafiic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic in the city. 
(b)  LSMV's shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  LSMV's may be operated over those streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights, tail lights, and brake lights. 
(d)  LSMV's shall not be operated two or more abreast in a single traffic lane. 
(e)  LSMV's shall be operated only on any highway or streets where the posted speed limit does not exceed 25 miles per hour. The operator of an LSMV shall not operate such vehicle on any street or highway where the posted speed limit exceeds 25 miles per hour. 
(f)  The operator driving LSMV's shall not engage in hazardous activities on the highway or streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of LSMV in any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of highway or streets and public access, for vehicular traffic, except for special events approved by the city. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also apply to operators of LSMV's. 
(h)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the LSMV. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the LSMV. 
(i)  Before any LSMV may be operated upon city streets or public areas of the city, it shall have installed thereon: 
(1)  An emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall be in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at the height of three feet to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(2)  An amber strobe light as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. The light must be functional at all times the vehicle is in operation, and shall be visible within 500 feet from the front and rear of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-6. - Exemption. 
The provision of section 21-6 entitled "operating regulations" shall not apply to private streets or cart paths in subdivisions designed as golf course communities if such exemption is requested by the developer of such community or a homeowners association in writing and approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-7. - All-terrain vehicle. 
All-terrain vehicles shall not be operated on any street or highway, sidewalk within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Sec. 21-8. - Penalties. 
Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 40 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-08, 4-9-2007) 
Chapter 22 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; adoption of standard gas code, § 5-1(3); adoption of standard plumbing code, § 5-1(4); adoption of national electrical code, § 5-1; emergency management, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Interference with property of utilities; theft of services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to: 
(1)  Injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, manhole cover or other apparatus belonging to any company engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other products, the furnishing of sanitary sewer service or water service or other public services; 
(2)  Utilize any such service or consume any such product; 
(3)  Prevent any meter from properly registering the quantity of service or product supplied; 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of any such company, or divert any service or product of such company; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such company. 
(b)  The person performing any of the acts proscribed by this section, and any person who, with the knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of any such service or product without proper charge as the result of action proscribed by this section, shall be deemed guilty of any offense. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1987-14, § 1, 9-14-87) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 22-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-08, §§ 22-2.1—22-2.6, adopted June 13, 2005, repealed § 22-2, and enacted new provisions set out as Art. VI. The former § 22-2 pertained to unlawful use of water during emergency or drought situation and derived from Ord. No. 1987-21, § I, adopted Dec. 28, 1987. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-171 et seq. 
Secs. 22-3—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06 § 1, adopted November 28, 2016, in effect repealed art. II, §§ 22-26—22-37 and enacted a new art. II, §§ 22-26—22-37 as set out herein. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-14, adopted September 25, 2000. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-26. - Rate schedule. 
Section 1 of that certain water and/or sewer ordinance of the city duly passed and adopted September 8, 1982 as same appears of file and on record in the minute book of said city and as subsequently amended, is hereby amended and consolidated by changing rate schedules as follows: 
From and after the passage of this article there be and is hereby the following water and sewer rate schedules for the city: 

 
An additional surcharge of $5.00 per month shall be added to the normal billing of all customers that apply for and receive a permit to use a shallow well in the city limits of Kingsland, said surcharge shall be applicable for each and every month that the permit to use shall be in force. 
Sewer usage is based on water metered. 

 

 
(a)  The rate schedule set forth above contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or a one-commercial operation. 
(b)  Master meter users such as multiple dwelling units, hotels/motels, office complexes, shopping centers, and trailer parks shall pay user fees based on master meter billing computed as follows: 
1.  Minimum charges as outlined herein for each unit. 
2.  Normal consumption charges as outlined above for all usage over 0 gallons per unit. 
(c)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as, industrial users, and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and city council on recommendations of the city's engineer. 
(d)  Remote read opt-out program. 
1.  An opt-out program is available to customers for the Meter Transmitting Unit (MTU) only; the installation/replacement of water meters is mandated as outlined in the water/sewer ordinance and cannot be opted out of. 
2.  The opt-out program is applicable to current property owners only. Current property owners are those listed on city tax records at the time of the opt-out election. Upon the sale or transfer of a property, a MTU must be installed as part of the remote read program unless the new owner elects to opt out under these guidelines. 
3.  A customer may, at his/her discretion, opt out of the remote read program, in order to do so, the customer must complete and submit the opt-out form provided by the department. 
4.  The customer can enter into agreement with the city by completing the required opt-out form. The agreement will include conditions of participation and an acknowledgement of the additional fees and charges that will be assessed due to the election to opt-out. 
5.  By opting out the customer acknowledges and accepts that they will be charged an additional opt-out fee in the amount of $25.00 for manual reading service (monthly) which will be added to the customer's utility bill. 
6.  Recurring monthly charge will begin once the city completes phases I and II of the smart meter technology project. Completion date to be determined by the city manager. 

 
A wheeled garbage container (solid waste receptacle) will be delivered to new customers within 3—5 business days of opening the account. The garbage container will be picked up by the city at the same time the final water meter reading is taken upon account closure by the customer. The current replacement cost of the container will be deducted from the customer's security deposit when the customer fails to return the garbage container to the city in a serviceable condition. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, §, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 1, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 1, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 1, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2006-20, § 1, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-06, 4-13-2015 ; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 1, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-27. - Application for water and sewer service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service and at the same time shall make a security deposit as follows: 

 

 
Deposits for consumers requiring meters larger than two inches shall be determined by estimating two months usage and applying current rate schedules. 
The security deposit required inside/outside the city shall be refunded to the customer when the wheeled garbage container is returned to the city in a serviceable condition, and all water and sewer bills are paid in full or when 24 consecutive timely payments are made on the customer's account, whichever occurs first. To qualify for deposit refund account cannot have any late fees, disconnect fees, penalties, or returned check fees in the 24 months preceding the issuance of the refund. (Effective date shall be July 1, 2015). 
All applicants for water and/or sanitary sewer who desire to not supply the city with a Social Security Number, which is to be used for collection purposes only shall submit a deposit for service in the amount of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 2, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 2, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 2, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 2, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 2, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 2, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 2, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 2, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 2, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 2, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 2, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 2, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 2, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-28. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
Section 3 of that certain water and/or sewer ordinance of the city duly passed and adopted September 8, 1982, and subsequently amended as appears office and on record in the minute books of said city, is hereby amended by changing fees as follows: 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water and/or sewer service of the city shall execute a water and/or sewer user's agreement and shall pay basic connection fees as follows: 
(1)  For water service: 

 
Consumers requiring water connections larger than two inches in size shall pay a proportionately higher connection fee based on current costs of labor and materials. 
In all cases of new multiple type users subscribing for water and/or sewer service, the city will make the determination as to die installation of either a master meters) or individual meters for each unit. 
(2)  For sewer service: The following average daily flow shall be utilized to determine the indicated connection fee: 

 
** Apartments are defined as a building designed for residential occupancy by three or more families living in separate units without firewalls separating the units and containing less than 1,500 square feet of living space per dwelling unit. 
(3)  For capital recovery fee: The following average daily flow shall be utilized to determine the indicated connection fee: 

 
**Apartments are defined as a building designed for residential occupancy by three or more families living in separate units without firewalls separating the units and containing less than 1,500 square feet of living space per dwelling unit. 
NOTES: 
(1)  Minimum sewer system treatment fee for commercial/industrial buildings: $800.00 + $100.00 = $900.00. All other tap fees will be computed on an individual basis by city engineer/city manager. 
(2)  These fees are for within the city connections. 
(3)  Customer must pay all expenses to bring water/sewer service to the point on the property line where the customer & the city agree that service will be provided. This includes the cost of a wet or dry tap of the lines. Mayor and council may negotiate this issue. 
(4)  Fees for outside the city service will be 50 percent higher. 
(5)  Flow GPD are determined by the city engineer and may vary or differ from the above in unusual cases. All variance from this division must be substantiated by a study. 
(6)  Any use not covered by this division will be computed by the engineer. 
(7)  Flow GPD will be computed to the nearest 1,000 where applicable. 
(8)  All applicants for water and/or sewer service for existing one-family, residential structures located within the city are eligible for service based on a payment plan. All fees shall be paid within 36 months of service. 
(9)  Connection to city sewer system shall only be permitted to those residents and businesses lying within the city limits. 
In the case of new multi-family or other large user type projects where the owner/developer installs all water and sewer facilities in accordance with city approved plans, including mains, trunk lines, taps, and meters, the city may establish a special assessment fee in lieu of the normal connection fee(s). 
Based on an assessment of the direct impact the development will have on water and sewer facilities, the special assessment fee may be less or greater than the normal connection fee. 
The special assessment fee shall be established by the mayor and council upon recommendation of the city engineer and in accordance with the agreement between the city and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources dated June 30, 1981. 
Sprinkler system: $240.00 per inch of pipe diameter. Each private line shall be equipped with an approved detector meter at customer's expense. 
Notes: 
(1)  In all cases of new multiple type users subscribing for water and/or sewer service, the city will make the determination as to the installation of either a master meter(s) or individual meters for each unit. 
(2)  Customer must pay the full cost of compound or other meters as determined by the city plus shipping cost. 
(3)  Fees for outside the city limits are to be 50 percent higher. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 3, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 3, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 3, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 3, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 3, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 3, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 3, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 3, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 3, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 3, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 3, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 3, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 3, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 3, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 3, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-29. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water or sewer service free of charge to anyone. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 4, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 4, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 4, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 4, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 4, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 4, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 4, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 4, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 4, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 4, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 4, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 4, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 4, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 4, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 4, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-30. - Time limitation for connections. 
When basic water and/or sewer connection fees have been paid by an individual type user, the subscriber shall have 12 months to connect to the system without additional charges, except as hereinbefore provided. 
If actual connection occurs during the following 12 months, the subscriber shall be required to pay any increase in the basic fee or fees that may have been adopted by the mayor and council by amendment to this article. 
At the end of 24 months, the total amount of connection fee(s) paid shall be reimbursed to the applicant minus an administrative fee of $100.00 if service tap(s) to the system have not been provided by the city and the connection to the tap has not been made by the applicant. 
If a tap service to the system has been made for a location(s), the total amount of connection fee(s) paid shall be forfeited by the subscriber as service rendered even if actual connection by the applicant/subscriber has not been made. 
Both water and sewer connection fees shall be transferable if requested and approved by the mayor and council, but additional assessment fees shall be assessed and payable to the city based on increased service demand as provided for in sections 22-26—22-28 contained herein. 
Subscribers for multiple type users shall also be required to comply with this section, however a detailed schedule for development and connection shall be agreed to by written instrument by the owner/developer and adopted by official action by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 5, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 5, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 5, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 5, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 5, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 5, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 5, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 5, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 5, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 5, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 5, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 5, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 5, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 5, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 5, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 5, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-31. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The basic connection fee shall be for a service line not exceeding 100 feet. 
(1)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's line or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connection or back-flow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(5)  The city shall run a sewer service line from its collection line to the property line where the collection line exists and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The basic connection fee shall be for a service line not exceeding 100 feet. 
(6)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its collection lines as may be required to render such service. 
(7)  Residential water meters (¾-inch) and small commercial water meters (¾-inch) remain the property of the city. The city is responsible for making repairs to the water meters when necessary. 
(8)  Commercial water meters are provided by the customer. Occasionally upon request, commercial water meters are ordered by the city and the customer reimburses the city at cost. Either way, commercial water meters, except small commercial (¾-inch) water meters, are the property of the customer, and the customer is responsible for maintaining and repairing the water meter to city standards. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 6, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 6, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 6, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 6, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 6, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 6, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 6, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 6, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 6, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 6, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 6, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 6, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 6, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 6, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 6, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 6, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-32. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. Should the city be called out after 4:30 p.m. and/or after the city's normal operating hours to turn on or off a water meter because there is no such cut-off valve for consumer's repairs or maintenance, it will be subject to a $25.00 service charge. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the State Health Department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system, by any piping permanent or temporary. 
(5)  Sanitary sewer service furnished by the city shall be for wastewater generated only by the city water system. No wastewater from private wells, storm drains, roof drains or similar sources shall be discharged into the system. 
(6)  The consumer's sewer piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained at the consumer's expense. All contractors or plumbers installing water/or sewer system service lines shall be registered at city hall and approved by the city. All such connections and service line work shall be done in accordance with city specifications, and all work shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to the piping being covered with earth. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 7, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 7, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 7, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 7, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 7, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 7, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 7, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 7, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 7, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 7, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 7, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 7, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 7, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 7, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 7, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 7, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-33. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
Extensions to the system, outside of existing right-of-way shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city a permanent easement of right-of -way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 8, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 8, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 8, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 8, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 8, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 8, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 8, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 8, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 8, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 8, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 8, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 8, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 8, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 8, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 8, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 8, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-34. - Change of occupancy. 
Notice during normal business hours must be given to the city to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water and sewer service prior to occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 9, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 9, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 9, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 9, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 9, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 9, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 9, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 9, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 9, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 9, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 9, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 9, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 9, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 9, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 9, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 9, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-35. - Meter reading; billing; collections. 
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid according to payment options listed on the bill, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment after the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. City must receive payment no later than 5:00 p.m. on the due date to avoid penalties. Postmarks and check dates are not honored. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 15 days from the due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. (Effective date shall be July 1, 2015). 
(3)  Nonpayment for 20 days after the due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement; and in such event the water and sewer user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply any water or sewer service under this division. (Effective date shall be July 1, 2015). 
(4)  When consumers have paid by check for services, and the check has been returned by the bank for insufficient funds (NSF), a $30.00 service charge will be added to the total due. If there was a bank error, upon notification from the bank in writing, the NSF fee will be waived. All NSF checks must be picked up and replaced with cash or a money order. We will not send an NSF check back through the bank for a second approval. If the NSF check was for the customer's security deposit, the water will be disconnected and in addition to the NSF fee an additional service charge of $25.00 will be charged. 
(5)  Two NSF checks on the same account written within 12 months of each other will result in the city not accepting any checks on that account for a minimum of 24 months from the date of the second check. 
(6)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of account will be restored only after account is paid in full, an additional security deposit may be required and a service charge of $25.00 will be applied to each utility account if it appears on the cut off list. If service is reconnected after 4:30 p.m., there will be an additional fee of $25.00 added to each account. If the garbage container has been removed by the city, an additional $25.00 service charge will be applied to return the garbage container to the customer's residence. 
(7)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. A service charge of $25.00 will be charged for service requested after 4:30 p.m. and/or after business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 10, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 10, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 10, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 10, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 10, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 10, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 10, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 10, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 10, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 10, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 10, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 10, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 10, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 10, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 10, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 10, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-36. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued by the customer, the security deposit shall be refunded to the customer by the city provided (a) the wheeled garbage container is returned to the city in a serviceable condition, and (b) all water and sewer bills are paid in full. 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment, the customer's water meter will be turned off and the garbage container picked up by the city. The security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account and any balance will be refunded to the customer. However, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the outstanding balance, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual manner provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)  As stated in section 22-35 above, service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills and service charges (to reconnect water and to return the garbage container) are paid in full and an additional security deposit as may be required is made. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the control of the city. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, or unavoidable accident. 
h.  Incomplete water/sewer or tap application. 
i.  Nonsufficient funds (NSF) check given to city. 
There is a transfer fee of $20.00 for transferring from one address to another within the city's water system. This will be added to the customer's bill at the time the transfer occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 11, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 11, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 11, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 11, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 11, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 11, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 11, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 11, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 11, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 11, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 11, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 11, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 11, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 11, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 11, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 11, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 22-37. - Complaints/adjustments. 
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim to the city before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest, and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of $20.00 provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of a fee of $20.00 provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. If the meter is tampered or broken by other than the city's representative, cost of damages will be charged on consumer's account. 
(4)  The statute of limitations applicable to refunding water/sewer/garbage service overpayments, whether due to a billing error, meter reading error or a faulty meter, etc., shall be three years from the date the error was discovered. If the utility billing department discovers that it has been undercharging a customer, the billing department shall require the customer to render the amount of any underpayment up to the preceding three years from the date the underpayment was discovered, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, § 12, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 12, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 12, 8-27-2001; Ord. No. 2202-06, § 12, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 12, 6-9-2003; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 12, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 12, 8-23-2004; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 12, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 12, 4-25-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 12, 4-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 12, 2-18-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-07, 7-13-2009; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 12, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 12, 7-26-2011; Ord. No. 2012-02, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 12, 5-11-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 12, 11-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 12, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 22-38, 22-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IDENTIFY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 22-40. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the identify theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-41. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identify theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-42. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Kingsland. 
Covered account means (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-43. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer. 
(c)  The city has not had any previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts related to water and sanitary sewer bills. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-44. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-45. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by finance director, or his or her designation, on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-46. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-47. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identify theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-48. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-49. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-50. - Program administration. 
The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identify theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-51. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. I, 10-26-2009) 
DIVISION 3. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, adopted Oct. 26, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 22-52—22-57. For purposes of classification and to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 22-52—22-55.2. 

Sec. 22-52. - Short title. 
Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-53. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-54. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Kingsland. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-55. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-55.1. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
Sec. 22-55.2. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-11, Art. II, 10-26-2009) 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY ENCROACHMENT PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, adopted December 10, 2018, repealed the former art. III, §§ 22-56—22-59, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original Code. 

Sec. 22-56. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Kingsland (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the City and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to article 9, section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Kingsland, Georgia; 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Kingsland, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the managing authority of the planning and community development department of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that is consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-57. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the planning and zoning department within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-58. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of planning and community development in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of planning and community development. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-59. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and Supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-60. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-61. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 22-62. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 22-58(e). 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Secs. 22-63—22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 22-101. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "wellhead protection" ordinance. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 1, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 22-102. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Hazardous waste or material. Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover therein. 
Wellhead. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 2, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 22-103. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 3, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 22-104. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone, shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 4, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 22-105. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 22-104 of this article: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 22-104; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 5, 2-24-97) 
Sec. 22-106. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2-1997, § 6, 2-24-97) 
Secs. 22-107—22-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS, INSTALLATION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 

Sec. 22-131. - Purpose, policy, and administration. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the regulation of the generation and disposal of grease interceptor waste for the protection of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and the environment. 
(b)  The objective of this article is to reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the POTW by preventing the accumulation of grease within the collection system lines. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who, by contract or agreement with the city, are users of the city's POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-132. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager, the director of community planning and development, and the director of public works, under the authority and supervision of the mayor and city council shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of the article. 
(b)  The city manager, the director of community development, and the director of public works, and persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may investigate compliance of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 2, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-133. - Specialized definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Adequately sized grease interceptor shall mean an interceptor that does not allow a discharge of oil and grease in excess of 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l) concentrations, or otherwise has not been found by the authority having jurisdiction to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause POTW line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the POTW in order to keep line stoppages from occurring. 
Approved shall mean accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the controlling authority. 
Authority having jurisdiction shall mean the city manager (or another official designated by the city manager) or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Biological pretreatment service shall mean the application of any additive or enzyme or the use of any other biological means to digest waste in an interceptor that discharges into a public sewer system within the city. 
Discharge shall mean the introduction of waste into a POTW. 
Disposal shall mean the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and/or sewage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters. 
Disposal facility shall mean a facility at which liquid waste, including but not limited to, grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and sewage is received, processed, or treated in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
Disposal facility operator shall mean an individual who is authorized to accept or reject liquid waste at a disposal facility, and who is authorized to sign a trip ticket, regardless of actual title. 
Disposal site shall mean a permitted site or part of a site at which grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, or seepage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations, and at which site said waste will remain after closure. 
Emulsifiers and/or de-emulsifiers shall mean any substance or substances which, when added or placed into a grease trap or grease interceptor, will form an oily substance to a milky fluid in which the fat globules are in a very finely divided state and are held in suspension, giving it the semblance of a solution; as the homogenization of milk emulsifies the fat with the whey forming a smooth milk product. 
Existing facility shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which started before the adoption of this article. 
Fats shall mean substances that are primarily fatty acid esters of the alcohol glycerol, also called acylglycerols, neutral fats, natural fats, or glycerides. They are the major components of depot, or storage, fats in plant and animal cells, especially in the adipose (or fat) cells of vertebrates. This term may include any synthesized substance of a like nature. 
Food courts shall mean areas predominantly found in shopping centers or amusement parks and festivals where several food preparation establishments having different owners may be sharing seating space and/or plumbing facilities. 
Food service establishment shall mean any facility that cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares or serves food, or which disposes of food-related wastes and/or which has a local, state, and/or federal food service permit. 
Garbage grinder shall mean a device, which shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the POTW. 
Generator shall mean a facility that causes, creates, generates, stores, or otherwise produces waste from on-site process operations, whether domestically or commercially generated, or as a byproduct of some domestic or nondomestic activity. The generator is responsible for assuring that the produced waste is disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local disposal regulations. 
Grease shall mean fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils and certain other non-fatty material from animal or vegetable sources, or from hydrocarbons of petroleum origins, commonly found in wastewater from food preparation and food service. Grease may originate from, but not be limited to, discharges from scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashing machines, soup kettles and floor drains located in areas where grease-containing materials may exist. 
Grease interceptor or interceptor shall mean a water-tight receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect, and restrict, the passage of grease and food particles into the POTW to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected, and to separate and retain grease and food particles from the wastewater discharged by a facility. 
Grease interceptor waste shall mean any grease, food particles, or organic or inorganic solid or semisolid waste collected and intercepted by a grease interceptor, usually in layers of floatable, suspended, and settleable substances, which are ultimately removed from a grease interceptor for proper disposal. All layers must be removed for disposal. 
Incompatible wastes shall mean wastes that have different processing, storage or disposal requirements, or whose mixture would inhibit the proper disposal or treatment of each type of waste, or wastes that if mixed may cause a dangerous chemical or physical reaction, including, but not limited to, grease interceptor waste and grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste and septic tank waste, seepage and hazardous waste, or any combination or combinations thereof. 
Inspection port shall mean openings, with easily opened covers, designed to allow inspectors quick access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the grease interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. A monitoring port is an inspection port large enough to allow temporary installation of monitoring devices such as samplers, strip recorders, flow meters, or other such measuring and/or monitoring devices. 
Inspector shall mean the community planning and development director, building inspector, code enforcement officer, or the director of public works, and person or persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, who are assigned to investigate compliance and detect violations of this chapter. 
Living quarters shall mean a facility, or an area of a facility, where a person or family has a distinct living area, which includes individual kitchen and bath facilities, utilized solely by that single person or family. 
Manager shall mean the person, regardless of actual title, immediately on-site at a location conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator, a transporter or a disposer. 
May not shall prohibit. 
New facility shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the adoption of this article, provided that: 
a.  The building structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing course; or 
c.  The production processes or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered; or 
d.  Any remodeling or modification that results in a new facility as determined by the community planning and development department. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
NPDES shall mean National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Oil and grease shall mean any material, but particularly biological lipids and mineral hydrocarbons, recovered as a substance soluble in an organic extracting solvent using an appropriate analytical method approved under 40 CFR 136. It also includes other material extracted by the solvent from an acidified sample and not volatilized during the extraction procedure. 
Permit to operate a vacuum truck cleaning service shall mean the formal written control document required and issued by the city to a transporter, which authorizes and entitles the transporter to collect and transport, or transport and dispose of, grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes at a permitted or registered treatment storage, or disposal site or facility, and regulates such activities. 
Permittee shall mean a person issued a permit under this article, including any agent, servant, or employee of the permittee. 
POTW shall mean publicly owned treatment works. 
Reasonable hours shall mean any time during which a facility is open for business to the public. It shall also include those times when a facility is closed to the public when a manager, employees, and/or contractors are present at the facility and involved in cleanup or food preparation, or any other business activity. 
Sewage shall mean the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated. The terms "waste" and "wastewater" shall be deemed as sewage by definition. 
Shall not shall prohibit. 
Spill shall mean the unpermitted, accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, seepage, any other liquid waste, a chemical (hazardous or nonhazardous), or any other material that has the potential to contaminate any surface or groundwater or in any other manner such that the waste is not duly and legally disposed. 
Shopping center shall mean a group of architecturally unified commercial establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned, and managed as an operation unit for sale or lease, with on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores at the site. 
Strip mall shall mean a line of stores fronted by uniform parking spaces or a small common parking lot. For the purposes of this article, strip malls and shopping centers are considered to be the same. 
Transporter shall mean a user who transfers waste from the site of a generator to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The transporter is responsible for assuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed regarding waste transport. 
Trip ticket shall mean the written, multi-part form used as documentation and required to be in the possession of the generator, transporter, and disposer to document the generation, receipt, transportation, and disposal of grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes enabling legal and proper disposal of hauled grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, and seepage at a permitted or registered disposal site, and specifying the identity of the generator, transporter, and disposal facility operator of liquid wastes and the volume of grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes disposed. 
Under the sink grease interceptor shall mean a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other fixtures likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, intercept or hold grease waste to prevent its entry into the POTW. The inspection division of the department of community development shall approve such "under the sink grease interceptors" and documentation shall be provided for the disposal of waste. Refer to section 22-134 below for applicability of this form of grease interceptor. 
Waste shall mean the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated. The term's "sewage" and "wastewater" shall be deemed as waste by definition. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 3, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-134. - Applicability. 
(a)  Waste, which contains grease, shall be discharged into the POTW system only under the conditions of this article. The following facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks, dishwashers, drains, and any other fixtures through which grease may be discharged, into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge enters the POTW, as well as providing a grease interceptor inlet flow control device inspection port and a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port: 
(1)  Every commercial food preparation and food service facility, including but not limited to bakeries, boardinghouses, butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, commercial kitchens, delicatessens, fat rendering plants, ice cream parlors, hospitals, meat packing plants, restaurants, schools, slaughter houses, soap factories, and similar facilities, especially where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products or fried foods are prepared or served, 
(2)  All shopping centers that have food processing facilities, 
(3)  All food courts, 
(4)  All other facilities discharging grease in amounts that, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, will, alone or in concert with other substances from the discharges of other facilities, have a reasonable chance to impede or stop the flow in the POTW. 
(b)  All new areas of intensified dwelling, including, but not limited to; apartment homes, apartment complexes, or multi-family residential dwellings consisting of four or more units, adult day care facilities, assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, day nursing and childcare facilities, in which food preparation occurs as defined in subsection (a)(4), homes for the mentally challenged, hotels, maternity homes, motels in which there is a commercial food preparation service, nursing homes, retirement and life care communities and homes, and truck stops with commercial food service, shall be required to have grease interceptors. Modifications to existing facilities that do not add new buildings or new grease generating activities are exempt from this requirement. All such existing facilities may be so required, as determined by subsection (a)(4), of this section. 
(c)  Interceptors shall not be required for single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, or apartment complexes, unless the city first determines there are discharges from the property that will create problems in the POTW. The determination shall be made based upon an investigation of the property and a comparison of the content and amount of discharge from the property with the discharges of other properties similar in size and use. Upon a determination that the discharges will create problems in the POTW, the authority having jurisdiction may require the installation of a sufficiently sized grease interceptor to treat the discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 4, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-135. - Compliance date. 
(a)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an existing facility (excepting those existing facilities described in subsection 22-134(c) above) shall be required to install an approved, adequately sized, and properly operated and maintained grease interceptor when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  It is found by the authority having jurisdiction to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the sanitary sewer collection system (POTW) in order to keep main line stoppages from occurring. 
(2)  It is remodeling the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facilities in such a manner to be subject to a permit issued by the department of community development. 
(3)  Its interceptor allows a discharge of oil or grease in excess of 300 mg/l. 
(b)  Existing facilities determined by this or other applicable ordinance to be equipped with an undersized grease interceptor shall, within 12 months of the effective date of this article, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(c)  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor not equipped with a grease interceptor shall, within 12 months of the effective date of this article, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(d)  New facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor shall install such a unit prior to commencement of discharge to the POTW. 
(e)  Any requests for extensions to installation dates must be made in writing to the authority having jurisdiction, at least 30 days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the reasons for the grease generator's failure or inability to comply with the compliance date set forth, the additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future delays. The authority having jurisdiction shall determine the date for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 5, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-136. - Discharge criteria. 
The following prohibitions shall apply: 
(a)  Where oil and grease are a byproduct of food preparation and/or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to separate waste oil and grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except as contained in byproducts of food preparation and/or clean up, waste oil and grease shall not be discharged to any drains or grease interceptors. Such waste shall be placed in a container designed to hold such waste and either utilized by industry or disposed of at suitable locations. 
(b)  None of the following agents shall be placed directly into a grease interceptor, or into any drain that leads to the interceptor: 
1)  Emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers, surface active agents, enzymes, degreasers, or any type of product that will liquefy grease interceptor wastes, 
2)  Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW, or 
3)  Any substance capable of passing the solid or semi-solid contents of the grease interceptor to the POTW. 
(c)  The influent to interceptors shall not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit (140° F). The temperature at the flow control device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the influent. 
(d)  Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge through a grease interceptor. 
(e)  All waste shall only enter the grease interceptor through the inlet flow control device, then the inlet pipe. 
(f)  Where food-waste grinders are installed, the waste from those units shall discharge directly into the building drainage system without passing through a grease interceptor. Living quarters, as defined in this ordinance, are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 6, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-137. - Requirements for grease interceptors. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial facilities dealing with grease shall, at the permittees' expense and as required by the authority having jurisdiction: 
(1)  Provide an adequately sized grease interceptor. Requirements for grease trap sizing and the design criteria are provided in subsection (b). 
(2)  Locate the interceptor in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Obtain a written interceptor service agreement with a licensed transporter for a term of at least one year, or for the duration of the operation of the establishment, whichever is less, to maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. A service agreement must be in effect as long as the facility has a grease trap permit. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction, service the interceptor every 30 days and maintain backup copies of trip tickets and a service log, on the premises of the facility, for at least three years. 
(5)  Report to the authority having jurisdiction monthly as defined in section 22-143. 
(6)  Allow demand inspection of the facility and of records by inspectors during reasonable hours. 
(b)  Requirements for grease trap sizing and design criteria. 
(1)  Introduction: Information contained within this document is based on standard industry practices and guidance found in both, the 2003 International Plumbing Code (IPC) Commentary, or latest edition, and the 2000 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), or latest edition, Appendix H. Size, type, and location of grease traps shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of the City of Kingsland Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Applicability: These requirements are applicable to all commercial food service establishments, including those that are undergoing: 
a.  New construction. 
b.  Interior remodeling to accommodate expansion or operational modifications. 
c.  Changes of ownership/occupancy. 
d.  Facilities, which may be experiencing difficulty in achieving compliance with maintenance and/or wastewater discharge limitations. 
(3)  Sizing requirements: Sizing methods described herein are intended as guidance in determining grease trap/interceptor sizes that will afford the city's sanitary sewer system (POTW) a minimum degree of protection against grease and other obstructing materials. Sizing determinations are based on operational data provided by business owners or their contractors. In approving a customer's plumbing or grease interceptor design, the city does not accept liability for the failure of a system to adequately treat wastewater to achieve effluent quality requirements specified under this article. It is the responsibility of the generator and/or contractors to insure the appropriate level of treatment necessary for compliance with environmental and wastewater regulations. 
Minimum acceptable grease trap/interceptor sizing shall be accomplished as follows: 
a.  Sizing according to formulas found in subsection (b)(4) below. 
b.  Where sizing formulas result in determination of a grease trap less than 1,000 gallons in capacity, this minimum size is recommended. However, under no circumstances should exterior grease traps less than 1,000 gallons be utilized. 
c.  In the circumstance of "single service kitchens" with no food preparation (heat/serve only), and which use only paper service items, a minimum 50 gallon per minute (gpm) flow rated, or 100 pound grease retention, mechanical grease trap may be used. In these instances, the grease trap is to be installed in an area separate from food handling area, and the trap must be readily accessible for cleaning and maintenance. (See subsection 22-137(b)(6), below) 
(4)  Grease trap sizing formulas: It is the responsibility of the generator and his/her contractors to ensure that the wastewater discharged from their facility is in compliance with the city's discharge limitations. For the purpose of plans review, a general assessment of grease trap/interceptor design and size will be performed using the following formulas. (These formulas have been demonstrated as industry standards capable of achieving the city's discharge criteria when systems are maintained in proper conditions.) 
Method 1: Uniform Plumbing Code, Appendix H 
Number of meals x waste flow x retention x storage = Size Requirement 
Per Peak hour (1) rate (2) time (3) factor (4) (liquid capacity) 
Factors: 
(1)  Number of meals served at peak operating hour (seating capacity) x peak factor 
a.  Where peak factor for fast food restaurant is ..... 1.33 
b.  And, peak factor for all other food service types is ..... 1.00 
(2)  Waste flow rate: 
a.  With dishwasher ..... 6 gallon flow 
b.  Without dishwasher ..... 5 gallon flow 
c.  Single service kitchen ..... 2 gallon flow 
d.  Food waste disposer ..... 1 gallon flow 
(3)  Retention times: 
a.  Commercial kitchen waste/dishwasher ..... 2.5 hours 
b.  Single service kitchen/single serving ..... 1.5 hours 
(4)  Storage factors: 
a.  Fully equipped commercial kitchen 
8 hr operation ..... = 1 
b.  16 hr operation ..... = 2 
c.  24 hr operation ..... = 3 
d.  Single service kitchen ..... = 1.5 
The Uniform Plumbing Code includes a built-in safety factor that can yield very large grease trap size specifications. At this time, the city is not requiring traps larger than 4,000 gallons. However, the decision to use a trap smaller than that specified by the formula and calculations above is to be addressed in the plan submission. 
Method 2: Five (5) hour detention/peak flow 
A. Gallons of water used per hour of operation 
B. A x 0.75 = average "gray water" flow per hour 
C. B x 1.9 peak flow factor 
D. C x 5 hours detention = volume trap 
Required volume of trap = A x B x C x D 
(5)  Alternate sizing formulas/proposals. Facilities that propose the use of alternate sizing techniques and/or procedures that result in specifications that differ from calculated requirements (or are less than the MINIMUM 1,000 gallon recommendation), must submit formulas and other bases to support proposed grease trap size/installation. Submission should also provide documentation of ability to meet effluent quality requirements. This proposal must be signed by a licensed plumbing contractor or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(6)  Construction/installation: All permitting, construction, and inspection activities must be completed in accordance with the Kingsland Land Development Ordinance. Additionally, the following specifications must be incorporated into grease trap design. 
a.  The grease interceptor shall be constructed with a minimum of two chambers or shall have a minimum of two tanks in series. If two chambered, the dividing wall must extend to within one foot of the bottom of the tank and within two inches of the top and be securely fastened to both sides. 
b.  There must be inlet and outlet tees made of schedule 40 PVC installed. The inlet tee should extend down approximately one-third the depth of the trap from the top and the outlet tee should be located 12 to 18 inches off of the bottom of the trap. 
c.  Grease traps are to be installed at a minimum distance of ten feet from sinks and dishwashers to allow for adequate cooling of wastewater. Water temperatures must be less than 140°F. prior to entering grease trap. 
d.  All grease bearing waste streams should be routed through an appropriate grease trap/interceptor, including: three-compartment sinks, pot/pan sinks, soup kettles, hand-washing sinks, dishwashers, mop sinks and floor drains. 
Notable exceptions: Drains that receive "clear waste" only, such as from ice machines, condensate from coils and drink stations, may be plumbed to the sanitary system without passing through the grease interceptor with the condition that the receiving drain is a "hub" type that is a minimum of two inches above the finished floor. 
e.  All exterior or recessed grease traps and interceptors are to be installed with an effluent sampling well, equivalent to: a. Parks Equipment Services Sample Well SWB-9; b. American Industrial Pre-Cast Products Test Well; or c. Uopnor Sample Well. Sample wells will have a 15" diameter access cover and a minimum four inch drop from inlet to outlet piping through the sampling well. Mechanical grease traps and Interceptors that are installed above ground must be equipped with an influent flow regulator and an effluent valve assembly that allows for sample collection. 
(7)  Customer (generator) responsibilities: It is the responsibility of the customer (waste generator) to insure compliance with the city discharge limitations. 
Hazardous wastes, such as acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, paint, solvents, or gasoline should not be disposed of where they would go through grease or grit traps. If commercial dishwashers are discharged through a grease interceptor, care must be taken in system design. Dishwashers use detergents and elevated water temperatures that will melt grease. If the interceptor is either too small or too close to the commercial dishwasher, grease may pass through the interceptor and into the collection system. 
Generators are responsible for maintaining grease traps in continuous proper working condition. Further, generators are responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation and function of grease traps and compliance with discharge limitations at all times. 
The generator must have a grease trap/grease interceptor service contract (for pumping, cleaning, and inspection) by a city permitted vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler, at a minimum frequency of every 30 days to ensure proper function. The trap shall be maintained more frequently if needed to meet the city's discharge criteria. Records of maintenance are required to be submitted to the city monthly for inspection and maintained on site for three years. (30-day maintenance frequency assumes proper sizing and installation consistent with this guidance). 
Enzymes, solvents, and emulsifiers are not permitted, as they will only change the form of grease, allowing it to be carried out of the trap with the wastewater and deposited in the collection system (POTW). Biological treatment systems must be pre-approved by the authority having jurisdiction. These systems will not alleviate the necessity for inspection and proper maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 7, 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 2004-11, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-2004) 
Sec. 22-138. - Grease interceptor construction. 
(a)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a grease interceptor shall, at his own expense and as required by the city, provide plans and specifications for equipment and facilities of a design type and design capacity approved by the inspection division of the department of community development of the city. The grease interceptor must be in compliance with the current applicable city plumbing codes. The person shall locate the interceptor in a manner that provides easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection and maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. The inspection division of the department of community development shall inspect the interceptor during construction and upon completion. All interested parties, including the inspection division of the department of community development and the authority having jurisdiction shall make a final inspection before any service connections are made. 
(b)  Construction of items listed herein in accordance herewith or in accordance to the city's specifications shall not constitute a defense to unlawful discharge and shall not limit the generator's liability for any surcharge stated in this division. 
(c)  If the authority having jurisdiction determines that there is a need for installation or upgrading of sample ports or grease interceptors on an existing establishment, the authority having jurisdiction may order the installation or upgrading of such interceptors on that existing establishment. If the authority having jurisdiction orders such installation, then the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of such order upon the grease generator. Within ten days of receipt of such order, the grease generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the authority having jurisdiction shall schedule a hearing to review such order within 30 days of receiving the demand for review from the grease or grit generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order upon the grease generator at least ten days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the grease generator may present evidence, and the authority having jurisdiction may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of the order to install or upgrade ports or interceptors on an existing establishment, it shall be unlawful for a grease generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer not in compliance with such order. 
(d)  Where the process wastewaters are generated in only part of the facility, the process wastewaters may, at the option of the authority having jurisdiction, discharge into a grease interceptor servicing only those areas that provide a suitable sampling port. 
(e)  The authority having jurisdiction may waive the requirement for a grease interceptor provided the grease generator can verify that only domestic sewage is being discharged, with no floor drains or process water. The authority having jurisdiction may require testing by the user in connection with this request, with all costs for this testing being at the users expense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 8, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-139. - Service/inspection ports and monitoring ports. 
(a)  Except for "under the sink grease interceptors", each interceptor shall be located outside of a building or structure in an area accessible for service, and so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, and for cleaning and removal of the intercepted waste. Inlet flow control inspection ports, interceptor inspection ports, and effluent monitoring ports shall be in areas where vehicles may not temporarily block access to inspection. The use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment or stored materials in order to inspect inlet flow control devices, inspect or service interceptors, or sample interceptor effluent shall constitute a violation of accessibility. Inspection ports and monitoring ports shall be located so as to allow inspectors quick and easy access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. An interceptor shall not be installed in any part of a building where food is handled. The location of all interceptors, inspection ports, and monitoring ports shall meet the approval of the authority having jurisdiction and shall be shown on the approved building plans. 
(b)  An inspection port shall be provided for the flow control device regulating flow into the interceptor. 
(c)  A one-piece removable metal plate covering the entire interceptor shall be preferred as an interceptor inspection port, though at the discretion of the authority having jurisdiction, standard manhole ports may be installed over each divider in the interceptor, but in either case all parts of the interceptor shall be easily accessible for cleaning and visual inspection. 
(d)  A monitoring port shall be provided for ease in sampling the treated effluent from the interceptor and shall be as close as possible to the connection with the city POTW within the bounds of the facility property. The port shall be installed according to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction. The port shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense. A generator shall properly place, monitor, and maintain the monitoring port so that wastewater samples taken from the monitoring port are representative of wastewater leaving the interceptor. It shall be unlawful for a grease generator to divert sewage around a monitoring point into the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 9, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-140. - Under the sink grease interceptors. 
(a)  In the event that an outside grease interceptor is not practicable, an "under the sink grease interceptor" may be installed subject to the approval of the inspection division of the department of community development. In addition to the regular requirements of grease interceptors, "under the sink grease interceptors" are subject to the additional requirements. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  The location of such interceptors shall be in as close proximity to the source of wastewater as physically possible. 
(2)  The lid shall be secured to the body with a single bolt. No wing nuts or screws shall be permitted. 
(3)  Baffle systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable to facilitate cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times. 
(4)  The lid shall cover the deep seal trap. The deep seal trap shall be constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of sewer gas entering the kitchen area. 
(5)  The interceptors shall be constructed with bottom supports so that the body of the interceptor does not corrode by coming into contact with the floor. 
(6)  The interceptor shall be coated with a powder coated electrostatically applied cathodic epoxy coating so as to be resistant to corrosion. 
(7)  The interceptor shall be equipped with a flow control fitting. 
(c)  Installation requirements. 
(1)  The interceptor may be set on the floor, partially recessed in the floor with top flush with the floor, or fully recessed below the floor to suit piping and structural conditions, as acceptable by the inspection division of the department of community development. 
(2)  There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the interceptor cover for cleaning. 
(3)  Unless specifically approved by the inspection division of community development, runs of pipe exceeding 25 feet between fixture and interceptor shall not be permitted. 
(4)  The interceptor shall not be installed in a waste line from a garbage grinder. Any garbage grinder waste shall bypass the interceptor. 
(5)  A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of the interceptor in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two or more sinks or fixtures are combined to be used by one interceptor, a single flow control fitting shall be used. 
(6)  Air intake for flow control either shall terminate under the sink drain board as high as possible to prevent overflow, or shall terminate in a return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building. 
(7)  To retain water and prevent siphoning, all interceptors shall have a vented waste, sized in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(8)  With the approval of the inspection division of the department of community development, one interceptor may be used to serve multiple fixtures if the fixtures are located close together and the interceptor is sized to meet the combined flow of all the fixtures. 
(d)  Maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Interceptors shall be serviced at least every week by a permitted vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler. After accumulated grease and waste has been removed, the interceptor shall be thoroughly inspected to make certain that inlet, outlet, and air relief ports are clear of obstructions. 
(2)  Grease and other waste removed from the interceptor shall not be introduced into any drain, sewer, or natural body of water. The waste shall be placed in proper containers for proper disposal. It shall not be mixed with "edible" grease. Grease and waste removed from an interceptor shall not be disposed of in such a matter so as to become food for animals or humans. 
(3)  The grease generator shall maintain adequate documentation that the interceptor is appropriately cleaned and inspected. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 10, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-141. - Interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  Interceptor maintenance service contract. 
(1)  All grease generators having interceptors shall perform all business transactions relating to interceptor pumping, cleaning, and servicing, and to liquid waste collection, transportation and/or disposal on a contractual basis via a written contract having duration of at least one year, and provide copies of all such contracts to the authority having jurisdiction. Any modifications or changes to the contract must be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction within ten working days of the change or modification. It is a violation for a grease generator to discharge through an interceptor without a service contract. 
(2)  A contract shall include at a minimum: 
a.  From the customer. 
1.  Contain the customer name, address and telephone number, and the name, address, and telephone number of the facility to be serviced if different. 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person for the facility. 
3.  Contain the grease interceptor permit number of the facility. 
4.  Indicate the size of each interceptor. 
5.  Indicate the precise and unambiguous location of the interceptor or interceptors to be serviced, including a diagram if necessary. 
6.  Indicate the frequency of pumpage required. 
7.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract. 
b.  From the vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler. 
1.  Contain the vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler company name, address, and telephone number. 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person. 
3.  Provide the city vacuum truck cleaning service occupation tax certificate number. 
4.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract. 
5.  The name, address, and telephone number of the disposal site. 
6.  The registration number of the disposal site. 
7.  Additionally, the transporter shall provide a: 
i.  Certificate of insurance. 
ii.  Certificate of assurance. 
iii.  Certificate of indemnification. 
c.  Other. Contain a statement of the duration of the contract, to be not less than one year, or for the duration of the operation of the facility, whichever is less. 
(b)  Required pumping frequency. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction, each interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once every month or more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the POTW, unless it can be demonstrated to the authority having jurisdiction that the pumping frequency can be performed at greater intervals. The authority having jurisdiction may specify cleaning more frequently when monthly pumping is shown to be inadequate. Additional pumping may be required during time periods where increased loading is anticipated. Any grease generator desiring a schedule less frequent than monthly shall submit a request to the authority having jurisdiction along with testing (as required by the authority having jurisdiction) and copies of the cleaning records for the last four interceptor cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the surface scum/grease layer. 
(2)  At any time if an inspection finds the interceptor to be full, immediate steps shall be taken by the grease generator to pump out and clean it as soon as is practicable. The inspector shall make an evaluation of the advisability of allowing discharge to continue, and may at his or her discretion order an immediate cessation of all discharge from the facility. In any case, the wastewater discharge permit of the facility may be amended so as to compel more frequent pumping and cleaning of the interceptor. 
(c)  All interceptors shall be maintained by the grease generator at the grease generator's expense. 
(d)  Requirement for increased pumpage or servicing. If the authority having jurisdiction finds that a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor is necessary for an establishment to meet the discharge limits stated in this article, the authority having jurisdiction may order a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor. If the authority having jurisdiction orders a change in the pumpage or servicing, then the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of such order upon the generator. Within ten days of receipt of such order, the generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the authority having jurisdiction shall schedule a hearing to review such order within 30 days of receiving the demand for review from the generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order at least ten days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the generator may present evidence, and the authority having jurisdiction may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of an order by the authority having jurisdiction to change the frequency and/or methods of pumpage or servicing, it shall be unlawful for a generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer (POTW) not in compliance with such order. 
(e)  Interceptor maintenance log. 
(1)  Every generator having an interceptor shall maintain an interceptor maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 12 months. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site, and shall be kept in a conspicuous location on the premises of the facility for inspection. Food service establishments shall keep the log posted with their Camden County Environmental Health Food Permit. Said log shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(2)  The information required in the maintenance log must be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction annually. The reporting period shall be January 1 through December 31 of each year. The report shall be submitted within 30 days after the end of the reporting period to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(f)  Cleaning procedures. 
(1)  The owner or an employee of the facility shall supervise the interceptor cleaning, and shall be physically present and observe the entire cleaning operation. 
(2)  A generator shall cause the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids, of all grease and/or grit interceptors and other interceptors during servicing. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. The suction of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall then be thoroughly scraped and the residue removed. The interceptor shall then be steam cleaned and the residue removed. Upon completion of the servicing, the manager of the facility shall make an inspection of the interior of the interceptor and then personally sign the trip ticket. The manager shall make an appropriate entry in the facility interceptor maintenance log, and post the generator section of the trip ticket in a conspicuous place with the log on the premises. Food service establishments shall keep all trip tickets posted with their Camden County Environmental Health Food Permit. Said trip tickets and maintenance logs shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a generator to allow, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids back into an interceptor during and/or after servicing. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. 
(4)  Each interceptor pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the interceptor volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the interceptor is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period following the transporter's inability to fully evacuate the interceptor. 
(g)  Disposal of interceptor pumpage. All waste removed from each interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and authorized to receive such waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the POTW, without prior written approval from the authority having jurisdiction, nor may it be returned to any portion of the POTW not specifically designated by the public works superintendent. Additionally, grease removed from an interceptor shall not be recycled so as to become a food product or part of a food product for animal or human consumption. 
(h)  Vacuum truck cleaning service. It shall be unlawful for a grease or grit generator to allow grease or grit interceptor waste to be removed from his premises by a transporter who does not have all applicable federal, state, or local permits or registrations, including at a minimum a vacuum truck cleaning service occupation tax certificate from the authority having jurisdiction, and a Georgia EPD waste hauler's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 11, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-142. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any facility to discharge effluent from a grease interceptor without authorization from the authority having jurisdiction. Authorization shall be given in the form of a "Grease Interceptor Permit." Application for a permit shall be made to the authority having jurisdiction. If, after examining the information contained in the grease interceptor permit application, it is determined by the authority having jurisdiction that the proposed discharge does not conflict with the provisions of this article, or any other federal, state, or local requirement or regulation, and the permit fee is paid, a permit shall be issued allowing the facility to discharge into the POTW. Each grease interceptor permit shall be issued for a time not longer than one year from the date of the permit. The grease generator shall apply for permit reissuance prior to the expiration of the grease generator's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the authority having jurisdiction at any time during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified or other just causes exist. The grease generator shall be informed of any proposed changes in the issued permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change(s). Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to the granting of a permit, the permittee under this section will agree to hold harmless the city and the city's employees from any liabilities arising from the permit holder's operations under this permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 12, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-143. - Required reporting. 
All permitted interceptor waste generators shall, at a frequency and time determined by the authority having jurisdiction, but in no case less than once per year, submit to the authority having jurisdiction: 
(a)  Copies of all manifests made by liquid waste transporters servicing their grease interceptor during the reporting period; 
(b)  A copy of the interceptor maintenance log; 
(c)  A copy of the interceptor service contract; and 
(d)  Any other information required by the grease interceptor permit, including analysis of the discharge to the POTW of such pollutants as the authority having jurisdiction may require. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 13, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-144. - Grease interceptor treatment products. 
(a)  Use of grease interceptor treatment products, including bacteria, designed to digest grease, is specifically prohibited without prior written consent of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Acceptance of such products for use may be considered only where a valid screening test, showing the product's ability to treat the waste and to produce an influent in compliance with this article, has been performed in accordance with methods outlined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Screening tests for such grease interceptor treatment products shall be designed by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)  The results of screening tests shall be subject to technical review by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(e)  All costs of screening tests shall be borne by the facility whether or not the product is accepted for use. 
(f)  If a product is accepted for use, each facility shall obtain written permission from the authority having jurisdiction to use the product. 
(g)  Complete descriptions of the chemical composition of all products must be disclosed to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(h)  The authority having jurisdiction may revoke permission to use such products where the effluent from the interceptor or basin in which the product is used fails to meet the requirements of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 14, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-145. - Mobile treatment processes. 
Any person wishing to make use of a mobile treatment process or of an on-site process to clean or service grease interceptors or grit interceptors shall demonstrate the process to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction. Included with the demonstration shall be a written explanation of the treatment process. Any costs to the city associated with the demonstration, such as, but not limited to sampling and analysis, shall be recovered. Complete descriptions of the chemical composition of all products must be disclosed to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 15, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-146. - Facility closure. 
When a facility with a grease interceptor closes for business, and is subsequently: 
(a)  Razed or demolished, then any grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall be either: 
1.  Physically removed, or 
2.  Have all effluent pumped out, a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the tank filled with soil or sand. 
(b)  Remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used, then the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps may be left in place, however: 
1.  The grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall have all effluent pumped out, the trap cleaned thoroughly, and the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps left dry and empty, and 
2.  Be re-plumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business, or 
(c)  Replaced with a type of business that will not utilize the grease interceptor, then that business may have any existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps: 
1.  Physically removed, or 
2.  Re-plumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business, or 
3.  Re-plumbed with a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps filled with soil or sand. 
In all instances, the owner of the premises shall appropriately inform the authority having jurisdiction and perform the closure at such a time so as to permit an inspector to be physically present during the removal or filling of the interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 16, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-147. - Monitoring, inspection and entry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a grease generator, whether or not the grease generator possesses a grease interceptor permit, to refuse to allow inspectors to enter their premises during reasonable hours to determine whether the grease generator is complying with all of the requirements of this article and permit or order issued hereunder. A grease generator shall allow the inspectors access to all parts of the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of additional duties. Arrangements for the immediate access of the authority having jurisdiction or his designate representative shall have been made ahead of time, and such failure to make adequate arrangements shall not be considered a legitimate reason to refuse admittance of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  In cases where a facility includes private living quarters, the right of access shall extend to all common areas, and any other area or areas a facility employee, including the manager and/or owner, may enter without expressed permission of the residents of such a facility. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the authority having jurisdiction has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the authority having jurisdiction may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 17, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-148. - Confidentiality and proprietary information. 
Information and data on a grease generator, or any other entity, obtained from reports, surveys, grease interceptor permits, and monitoring programs, and from the authority having jurisdiction's inspection and sampling activities, and any other information submitted to the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to this article, shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 18, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-149. - Timing. 
All written reports, applications, and any other such material required by those regulated under this article will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For material, which is not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 19, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-150. - Fees. 
The city may adopt, by separate ordinance, charges, surcharges, and fees for application, operation, enforcement, administration, and reimbursement of costs incurred pursuant to this article. 
Fees: 
(a)  The authority having jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council shall establish permit fees under this article which shall be included in the plumbing permit fee as set in the Kingsland Land Development Ordinance. 
(b)  The fees for such permits shall be for a permit issued for a period of one year. The authority having jurisdiction may prorate the amounts for permits with shorter durations. All permits will expire at 12:00 midnight on the date specified on the permit as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 20, 3-22-2004; Ord. No. 2004-09, 5-10-2004) 
Sec. 22-151. - Violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any grease generator to discharge into the POTW in any manner that is in violation of this article, or of any condition set forth in this article. Additionally, a person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a grease interceptor or the POTW, including alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to rise above the design capacity of the interceptor. 
(b)  No person, and/or facility shall discharge grease in excess of 300 mg/l to the POTW. If such discharge occurs, the person or facility shall be considered in violation of this article and subject to the remedies described herein. This includes non-permitted facilities. 
(c)  The authority having jurisdiction and/or city may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction; in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
(1)  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; 
(2)  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer collection system; 
(3)  Causes interference to the POTW; or 
(4)  Causes the city to violate any condition of its environmental protection division permit. 
(d)  Any person notified of a suspension of the water or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water or sewer service and/or revocation of the city occupation tax certificate, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or sewer connection or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the water or sewer service and/or occupation tax certificate when such conditions causing the suspension have passed or been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the grease generator describing the cause(s) of the harmful discharge and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(e)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, association, LLC, LLP or PS legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(f)  Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and not more than 12 months confinement for each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(g)  A permittee is liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate clean-up and proper disposal of said waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed clean-up costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty party. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 21, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-152. - Authorization. 
The authority having jurisdiction is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter according to its terms and intent. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 22, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 22-153. - Mobile treatment processes. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The authority having jurisdiction may take any legally authorized actions against a noncompliant permittee or generator. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 23, 3-22-2004) 
Secs. 22-154—22-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATER USE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-08, §§ 22-2.1—22-2.6, adopted June 13, 2005 pertained to outdoor water use and was designated §§ 22-2.1—22-2.6. To perverse the sty of the Code and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 22-2.1—22-2.6 as §§ 22-221—22-226. 

Sec. 22-221. - Definitions. 
When used in this article: 
(1)  Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. 
(2)  Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.1, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 22-222. - Applicability of rule. 
These rules apply to any property or address located within the city limits of the City of St. Kingsland and to any user or customer of the city's water system who uses treated city water for outdoor uses. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.2, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 22-223. - Outdoor water use schedule during nondrought periods. 
(a)  Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.3, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 22-224. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a)  The mayor for the city is authorized to make drought declarations, consistent with the declaration of drought response level made by the director of the environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  During declared drought conditions outdoor water use, other than exempted activities, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c)  Declared drought response level one—Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days with the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(d)  Declared drought response level two—Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(e)  Declared drought response level three—Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
(2)  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care of structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailer, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Noncommercial fundraising, such as car washes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f)  Declared drought response level four—No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for exempted activities, or as the mayor may order. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.4, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 22-225. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules for this rule: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Georgia EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly (in places less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during the allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Georgia EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of nondrought and declared drought response level one. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of nondrought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors: during installation and as need for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power-washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.5, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 22-226. - Penalties. 
Willful violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 22-2.6, 6-13-2005) 
Secs. 22-227—22-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-11, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, set out provisions pertaining to restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape. At the city's instruction these provisions have been included as Art. VII, §§ 22-231, 22-232. 

Sec. 22-231. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-232. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. 
(b)  The City of Kingsland shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court/municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 2, 12-13-2010) 
Secs. 22-233—22-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEWER USE ORDINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, this Article VII has been renumbered to Art. VIII. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-300. - Title. 
This article may be known as and may be cited as the "Sewer Use Ordinance of the City of Kingsland." 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-301. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Kingsland wastewater collection system and treatment works, to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] Section 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403), and to provide for the public's health and welfare by regulating the quality of wastewater discharged into the city's wastewater collection system and treatment works. This article provides the city a means for determining wastewater volumes, constituents and characteristics; the setting of charges and fees; authorizing the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; requiring user reporting; providing for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; and establishing administrative review procedures. This article establishes effluent limitations and other discharge criteria for all users and provides that certain users shall pre-treat waste to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's publicly owned treatment works (hereinafter referred to as POTW) that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; contaminate the sewage sludge; pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; harm POTW personnel in the course of their POTW operations and the general public, and spoil opportunities to reclaim and reuse wastewater and sludge from the POTW. This article provides measures for the enforcement of its provisions and abatement of violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-302. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the following phrases and words shall have the meaning assigned below, except in those instances where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or "the act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The director, environmental protection division (EPD), Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) or the Regional Administrator, Region IV, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions of the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership, limited liability company or sole proprietorship: a general partner, a manager or a proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
(5)  If an authorization under paragraph (4) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (4) of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Best management practices or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in division 5, sections 22-384 and 22-385 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. [Note: BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards or effluent limits.] 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. A measure of the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Chemical oxygen demand. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
City. The city council of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, or its duly authorized representative. 
Control authority. The director, after the city receives approval of its pretreatment program. 
Director. The city's director of water and wastewater, or his duly authorized representative, designated to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article. 
Domestic sewage. Water carrying wastes of human origin, as opposed to commercial or industrial activities. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
Flow proportional composite sample. A sample consisting of several individual portions in which each portion of the sample is proportionate to the flow and combined to form a representative sample. 
Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
General pretreatment regulations. "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Code of Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, in July 2006, and any revisions to same. 
Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream. 
Holding tank waste. Any wastes from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, 
(2)  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)1) and (b). 
Mass emission rate. The weight of material discharged to the POTW during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued to a POTW or an industry pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
National pretreatment standards. Pretreatment standards or standards. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits that apply to industrial users, such as prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)b., or (1)c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
Pollutant. Any dredged soil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; chemical wastes; medical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of, discharging such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the City of Kingsland as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1362), which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Publicly owned treatment works, treatment plant or POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed, intended and/or used to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights to use, and are controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage. A combination of the water carrying wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters) to the POTW; 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) of this subsection has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that the user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance. A user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in division 5; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pre-treatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined in division 5, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in a POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of sections 22-384 and 22-385 of this article. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge, which has reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
Storm drain or storm sewer. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant defined in Section 307(a)(1)(33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act and include metals and manmade organic compounds. 
User. Any person, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW. 
Waste. Includes wastewater and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operations. 
Wastewater. Waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a POTW. 
Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state. Any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  BOD—Biochemical oxygen demand (five day). 
(2)  C—Celsius. 
(3)  CFR—Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  CIU—Categorical industrial user. 
(5)  COD—Chemical oxygen demand. 
(6)  EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(7)  EPD—Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(8)  F—Fahrenheit. 
(9)  mg/L—milligrams per liter. 
(10)  NPDES—National pollutant discharge elimination system. 
(11)  pH—Logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion activity in moles per liter. 
(12)  POTW—Publicly owned treatment works. 
(13)  TSS—Total suspended solids. 
(14)  USC—United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-303—22-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 22-311. - Unsanitary, offensive deposits on property generally. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any human excrement, garbage or other noxious waste on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-312. - Discharging wastes to natural outlets. 
It shall be a violation of this article to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-313. - Sewer connection required if available. 
The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided the public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line and access is available over public land. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-314. - Sewer service to adjacent unincorporated areas. 
In the event the city extends the sewer system to adjacent unincorporated areas, all provisions of this article will apply. Rates for sewer service will be established as necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-315—22-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 22-331. - Private disposal prohibited unless expressly permitted. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be a violation of this article to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-332. - Compliance required. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 22-313, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-333. - Permit required; application, fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-334. - Approval of installation. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, which inspection shall be made within 48 hours (Saturdays and Sundays excluded) of the receipt of the notice by a representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-335. - Type, capacity, location, and layout. 
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all of the recommendations of the Department of Human Resources of Georgia. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot size is less than the minimum area recommended by the Department of Human Resources of Georgia. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-336. - Discontinuing use when sewer becomes available. 
Within 90 days of the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 22-313, a direct connection may be required by the director to be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article. If connection is required, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal filters shall be filled with suitable material and abandoned at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-337. - Requirements of other authorities not affected. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction over private sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-338. - Private operation and funding. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, unless an agreement in writing has been made with the director for such operation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-339. - Septic tank hauler. 
It shall be a violation of this article for a private septic tank pump out hauler to deposit sewage in a manhole or other point of discharge in the city POTW without approval of point of discharge and payment of fees as established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-340—22-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 22-351. - Permit required to uncover, connect with, etc., public sewer. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances hereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-352. - Same—Classes. 
A building sewer permit is required before any residential, commercial, or industrial user connects to the public sewer. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee as prescribed in article 2 for a building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-353. - Responsibility for cost of installation and connection: indemnification of city. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-354. - Separate and independent building sewers. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided by the owner for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available nor can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-355. - Old building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-356. - Specifications and installation standards. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the building code, plumbing code and all other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. All joints of the building sewer shall be tight and waterproof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-357. - Building sewer elevation; lifts. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-358. - Connections permitting surface runoff. 
No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-359. - Connection standards. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-360. - Notice of readiness for, and supervision of connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-361. - Excavations, protection, restoring streets, etc. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by the building owner in a workmanlike manner satisfactory to the city. Construction shall comply with the applicable provisions of P.L. 91-596, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-362. - Toilet facilities and connection after notice. 
The owner of any housed building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-363. - Connection application form—Residential and commercial. 
Each applicant for a residential or commercial building sewer connection along with the director shall fill out and sign a form prescribed therefore before a permit or license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-364. - Same—Industrial. 
Each industrial sewer applicant along with the director shall fill out and sign the prescribed form before a permit or license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-365—22-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-381. - Purpose and policy. 
This division establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of wastewater which may be lawfully discharged into the POTW. The specific limitations set forth in section 22-394 of this division and other prohibitions and limitations of this division, are subject to change to ensure that they are sufficient to protect the operation of the POTW, to enable the POTW to comply with its NPDES permit, to provide a cost effective means of operating the POTW, and to protect the public health and the environment. The director shall recommend changes or modifications to the city manager, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-382. - Discharge of stormwater, etc.—Prohibited into sanitary sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-383. - Same—Required to be into storm sewers or natural outlet. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the EPD, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-384. - Discharges prohibited into public sewers—Absolute prohibition. 
No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. The general and specific prohibitions in this section and section 22-385 apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. These prohibitions, in addition to all other provisions of the general pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution (40 CFR Part 403, as amended), apply to all users of the POTW. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW any of the following described waters or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may become, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, as amended, or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, or to the environment. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, fuel oil and any other substance which is a fire hazard to the system. 
(2)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65.5 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference. Also prohibited is any wastewater that will cause the temperature of the POTW treatment plant influent to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C). 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5, or otherwise having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW or the environment. 
(4)  Any slug discharge of wastes, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will result in interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Any solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or result in interference such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(6)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause pass through or interference, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, cause acute worker health and safety problems, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed the limitations set forth in this article or an individual wastewater discharge permit. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act, as amended. In the event of toxicity being found in the POTW, the city may at its discretion require industrial users to participate in a toxicity reduction evaluation in accordance with the provisions of the city's NPDES permit. 
(7)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(8)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(9)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause pass through or interference. 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director. It shall also be a violation of this article to discharge to any storm sewer within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-385. - Same—Conditional prohibition. 
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, POTW treatment plant processes or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature and capacities of the treatment plant processes, capacity of the treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any POTW treatment plant process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard to the environment or in the receiving waters of the treatment plant. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees F. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.75 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(6)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the POTW treatment plant processes, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement of arrangement between the city and any user of the POTW, whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments of user charges as may be applicable. In no case shall the city enter a special agreement such that any applicable federal or state regulations would be violated. No statement in this division or in this section is intended or may be construed to prohibit the appropriate agency from adding, deleting or changing specific requirements or from making specific requirements more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the POTW, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge from the POTW to violate effluent or stream quality standards imposed or as may be imposed by the EPD or the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-386. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 03.6(e). 
(3)  A CIU may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(b)  All industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall comply with all requirements of such standards, and shall also comply with any additional or more stringent limitations contained in this division or established by the State of Georgia. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for existing sources subject to such standards shall be within three years following promulgation of the standard unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the standard. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards for new sources shall be required upon promulgation of the standard. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-387. - Septic tank pumping, hauling, and discharge. 
No person owning "septic tank" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such sewage into the POTW, unless such person shall first have obtained approval from the director. All operators must agree to abide by the provisions of this article and any special conditions or requirements, including fees, established by the director. The director shall designate the locations and times such trucks may discharge into the POTW, and may refuse to accept any truckload of waste at his absolute discretion when it appears that the waste could interfere with the effective operation of the POTW. The director may require septic tank waste or other liquid waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the septic tank waste or other liquid waste haulers to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-388. - Pretreatment requirements. 
Industrial users shall design, construct, operate, and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities, at the user's expense, as necessary to achieve compliance with the local limits set forth in section 22-394, the categorical pretreatment standards, and the prohibitions set out in this division of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, EPD, or the director, whichever is more stringent. These pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the city and maintained in proper working conditions at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-389. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for such wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the director for acceptance before such facilities are constructed. The director shall review said plans within 60 days and shall recommend to the user any changes. Prior to beginning construction of said pretreatment facility, the user shall also secure such building, plumbing, or other permits that may be required by the city. The user shall construct said pretreatment facility within the time provided in the user's wastewater discharge permit. Following completion of construction, the user shall provide the director with "as-built" drawings to be maintained by the director. 
(b)  Any review and acceptance by the director such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility of producing a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Nor shall any fixed or verbal agreement as to the limits of constituents or volumes of waters or wastes be considered as final approval for continuing operation. These limits will be subject to constant study and change as considered necessary to serve their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-390. - Accidental/slug discharges. 
(a)  All industrial users shall provide facilities and/or institute procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the POTW from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, in-plant transfer or processing and materials handling areas, and diked areas or holding ponds. 
(b)  In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone, and to notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume, and corrective actions taken. 
(c)  Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, the waters of the State of Georgia or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could potentially cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, and follow the procedures outlined in this section when such an occurrence arises. 
(e)  Upon evaluation and decision by the director, any industrial user may be required to develop, submit for approval, and implement a plan to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for promptly notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a discharge prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b) or section 22-184, including procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  Any necessary procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge; including, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-391. - Fats, oils, and grease traps/interceptors. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) traps/interceptors shall be provided in accordance with article V, City of Kingsland FOG Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-392. - Rates for water and sewer service. 
Rates for water and sewer services are set by the "rate schedule," section 22-26 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kingsland and its subsequent amendments. The effective rate schedules are available at the city clerk's office. In addition, the city may assess a separate fee to industrial users for costs incurred by the city and related to the pretreatment requirements stated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-393. - Special agreements and arrangements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial user. The terms and conditions of any such agreement may not, however, result in a violation of any industrial pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-394. - Local limits. 
No person or user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the following concentration limits unless a special permit condition is issued with an individual wastewater discharge permit. Special permit conditions may be issued for the following reasons: 
(1)  The industrial user is in compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, and the receiving plant's influent wastewater characteristic is within the guidelines established to protect the treatment plant operations and receiving stream water quality, 
(2)  A higher interim concentration level is allowed in conjunction with a requirement that the user construct a pretreatment facility or institute changes in operation and maintenance procedures to reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels not exceeding the local limits set forth within a fixed period of time, or 
(3)  For users having discharges of less than 10,000 gallons per day, a mass limit may be applied based on the maximum acceptable concentration at a flow of 10,000 gallons per day. 
The following limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations below. 
25 mg/L ammonia-nitrogen 
0.01 mg/L arsenic 
300 mg/L BOD5 
0.008 mg/L cadmium 
0.01 mg/L total chromium 
0.05 mg/L copper 
Cyanide prohibited 
0.05 mg/L lead 
Mercury prohibited 
0.04 mg/L molybdenum 
0.02 mg/L nickel 
0.01 mg/L selenium 
0.025 mg/L silver 
40 mg/L Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 
10 mg/L total phenols 
4.0 mg/L total phosphorus 
300 mg/L TSS 
0.15 mg/L zinc 
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards may establish limits for pollutants not listed above, including specific organic substances. All users must comply with the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In addition, the director may limit the discharge of other specific substances not listed above on a case-by-case basis, if the discharge of that substance is shown to interfere with the operation or performance of the receiving POTW, violates any receiving stream water quality standards, jeopardizes POTW worker health or safety, or endangers the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009; Ord. No. 2015-01, 1-12-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-395. - Dilution prohibition. 
No user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the categorical pretreatment standards, or any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-396. - Right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-397—22-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS BY POULTRY OR ANIMAL PROCESSORS 

Sec. 22-411. - Screening of sewage and waste required. 
No person engaged in the processing of poultry or animals in the city shall empty any sewage or waste from such poultry or animal processing plant into the sewer system of the city without first screening said waste through a screen or screens to be installed and operated as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-412. - Maximum size of screen openings. 
The screen through which said sewage and waste shall be passed before emptying into the sewer system of the city shall have clear openings in said screens not larger than twelve ten-thousandths (0.0012) of a square inch. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-413. - Removal of solids from screens: disposition. 
Said persons are required to remove all solids from said screens as the solids accumulate thereon. Such solids shall not be placed in the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-414. - No solids to escape; pipes for liquids. 
The screen shall be so installed that no waste of any kind shall go into the sewer system of the city without passing through the screen. Liquids from which solids have been removed shall be conveyed to the city sewer system in a closed pipe or conduit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-415. - Approval of drawing and word description. 
Before the installation of any wire screen, a drawing and word description of the proposed screen and installation thereof shall be submitted to the director for his review and no such screen may be installed until said drawing and description have been accepted in writing by the director. The drawing shall show a diagrammatic layout of the drain system and shall show how all waste is to be conveyed to the screen and to the city sewer system. The description of the screen shall include specifications and size capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-416—22-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT, DISCHARGE REPORTS, AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 22-431. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall discharge wastewater only in accordance with the conditions of their individual wastewater discharge permits. All significant industrial users of the POTW shall apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit in the manner hereinafter set forth. Permit application forms will be sent to affected users by the director following promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard or a determination by the director that a permit be issued. A permit application shall be submitted by the user, accompanied by a fee set by the city, within 180 days after promulgation of a categorical standard or a determination by the director that a permit be issued. 
(b)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-432. - Permit issuance. 
All wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations including the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for New and Existing Sources set out in 40CFR, Subchapter N, parts 401 through 471. Permits must contain the following: 
(1)  Statement of permit duration (in no case more than five years); 
(2)  Statement of non-transferability without prior notification to the city and provisions for furnishing a copy of the existing discharge permit to the new owner or operator; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on federal, state, and local law; 
(5)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(6)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. Permits may contain, but need not to be limited to, the following: 
a.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; 
b.  Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
d.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measuring devices; 
e.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
f.  Compliance schedules; 
g.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
h.  Requirements for retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge; 
i.  Requirements for notification to the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW; 
j.  Requirements for notification to the director of slug discharges; 
k.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
l.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
m.  Requirement for notification of any bypasses around treatment systems; 
n.  A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and 
o.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
Prior to issuing an individual wastewater discharge permit, a draft permit will be sent to the user which will show the conditions and discharge limitations. The user will be allowed 30 days to show cause why any of the conditions of this permit should not be required. Upon approval of the draft permit or after resolution of permit conditions with the director, a formal permit will be issued to the applicant which will remain in effect until revoked by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-433. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (1)(b) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsections (2) a.—e. below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated process for existing sources. 
2.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
3.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
4.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection 22-434(a) of this article. 
5.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsections 22-434(b) and (c) of this article. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 22-433(b) of this article. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 22-433(f) of this article. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 22-433(a)(2)g. of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in subsections 22-433(a)(2)d.—f. of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection 22-433(f) of this article. 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to the permitting requirements established in this section shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities as required by the permit. All industrial users shall submit to the city at least once every six months (on dates specified by the director) reports describing the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. The report shall be based on sampling and analyses performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136. The sampling and analyses may be performed by the city in lieu of the industrial user. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities and equipment shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in subsections 22-434(b) and (c) of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Changed conditions reports. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least five days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 22-432 of this article. 
(2)  The director may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under section 22-431(b) of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 22-436 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. 
(1)  All reports and applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user, independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(g)  Wastewater survey questionnaire. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(h)  Notification of hazardous waste discharge. A user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All users shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e). 
Discharges are exempt from the above requirements of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-434. - Samples and analyses. 
(a)  All sample analyses performed for the purpose of determining permit compliance or developing wastewater characterization data, whether performed for the user or the city, shall be at the user's expense. All wastewater sample analyses shall be performed in accordance with the wastewater procedures described in the "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants," 40 CFR 136, or other procedures approved by the director. 
(b)  Except as indicated in subsections (c) and (d) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(c)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(d)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in subsections 22-433(a) and (c) [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs in subsection 22-243(d) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(e)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The city performs sampling at the user's facility at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(2)  The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(f)  When required by the director, the industrial user shall provide for adequate documentation of pretreatment controls such as standard operating procedural manual and/or quality control programs. 
(g)  If the city performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the city will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-435. - Duration of permits. 
Wastewater discharge permits, as provided for herein, shall be of full force and effect only so long as user complies with all terms and conditions of said permit, city ordinances, and any and all other applicable rules and laws of the State of Georgia and/or federal statutes or regulations. Said permit may be revoked by the city upon determination by the director or his duly authorized representative that user is in violation of any city ordinances, and/or any and all other applicable rules, regulations and laws of the State of Georgia and/or federal statutes. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. A user must apply in writing for a renewal permit within the period of time not more than 90 days and not less than 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-436. - Changes to permits. 
The terms and conditions of a permit are subject to modification by the director for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, the city's POTW beneficial sludge use, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or condition of the individual wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. Users shall be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the director at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new condition in a permit shall include a provision for a reasonable time schedule for compliance. The user may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager in regard to any changed permit conditions as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-437. - Transfer of a permit. 
Individual wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An individual wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new owner, new user, or for different premises, unless approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-438. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article is subject to be modified, suspended, or revoked in whole or in part during its term for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit or other applicable law or regulation; 
(2)  Obtaining of a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; 
(3)  Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their discharge; 
(4)  Failure of the user to report material changes in his operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(5)  Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, testing, or monitoring; or 
(6)  A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-439. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-440—22-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, AND ENTRY 

Sec. 22-451. - Right of entry. 
The director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director, or his/her designee, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties: 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director, or his/her designee, will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director, or his/her designee, shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director, or his/her designee, may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency recommended by the manufacturer to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director, or his/her designee, access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-452. - User operation of monitoring facilities. 
The user shall provide and operate at its own expense monitoring facilities to provide sampling, and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the monitoring facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. In addition, the city may at any time and without prior notification to the user, inspect and sample, at the expense of the user, any user of the POTW. 
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed in accordance with a schedule established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-453. - Observance of safety rules. 
While performing necessary work on private properties the director or his duly authorized representative shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-454. - Inspections where city holds easement. 
The building inspector and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-455—22-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 

Sec. 22-471. - Authority to enforce. 
The City of Kingsland, Georgia, and its designees, are hereby granted all of the authority of Kingsland, Georgia to deal with, exercise or apply all of the powers and authority of Kingsland, Georgia, with respect to the subject matter of this article, all of the authority and powers contained in the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, in thereto, in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as presently amended and/or federal law on the subject of water pollution and control, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
The city, and its designees, are hereby authorized to develop formulas and promulgate regulations, including enforcement actions, to provide, but not limited to, the sharing or paying of costs according to benefit or otherwise, or facilities, connections, service charges, discharge fees, pretreatment charges, retainers, interceptors, permit fees, user charges and fees, sampling, testing, measuring and monitoring fees. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-472. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the director finds that a user has violated or is violating this article, or an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon said user a written notice of the violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-473. - Consent orders. 
The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurance of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 22-475 and 22-476 below. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-474. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order a user which causes or contributes to violation of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-475. - Compliance order. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-476. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a representative for, taking any other actions against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-477. - Administrative fines. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the director to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the user. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-478. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the individual wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 22-279 are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of the hearing described in section 22-474. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-479. - Termination of permit. 
Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or any applicable or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection (including photocopying necessary documents), monitoring, or sampling. A noncompliant user will be notified of the proposed termination of its individual wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 22-474 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-480. - Other enforcement remedies. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, the director, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the city court. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director, through counsel may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The director shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(2)  Falsifying information. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both. 
(3)  Damaging facilities. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, remove, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to section 22-480 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-481. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Annual publication of significant noncompliance. The director shall publish, at least annually, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, with any provisions of this article or any permit or order issued hereunder during the period since the previous publication. Significant noncompliance is defined in section 22-302 of this article. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months. This notification shall be sent to the U.S. EPA and the Georgia EPD. 
(b)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(c)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. 
(d)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(e)  Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent limitations of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the director or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(f)  Contractor listings. 
(1)  Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. 
(2)  Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-482. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Treatment bypasses. 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(3)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs (4), (5), (6), and (7) of this section. 
(4)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Director, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
(5)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(6)  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraphs (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse affects, it the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (6) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-483—22-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 22-491. - Actions by the city. 
If water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the POTW in violation of any provision of this article, the city may after notifying the offender and providing a hearing before the city: 
(1)  Terminate or reject the discharge of water and wastes by the violator into the POTW; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to a condition as authorized and/or required by this article, or any water or waters into the POTW; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and flow rates of waters or wastes entering the POTW as authorized and/or required by this article; 
(4)  Require payment by the violator to cover the added capital and operating costs, not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, of handling and treating otherwise prohibited wastes which can be documented as reasonable charges for the materials, supplies, labor and other costs actually required; 
(5)  Revoke the user's permit. Any person failing to pay any sewer use charges authorized by this article shall be subject to termination of his sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-492. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the director for a civil penalty of at least $1,000.00, state law permitting, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(b)  The director shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-493. - Criminal prosecution. 
Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 6-8-2009) 
Chapter 23 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 11; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23-1—23-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Callbox stand means a place alongside a street or elsewhere where the city has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity to install a telephone or callbox for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs. 
Certificate means a business license issued by the city authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
Holder means a person to whom a business license has been issued under this article. 
Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city which has been designated by the city as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
Rate card means a card issued by the city for display in each taxicab, which contains the rates of fare then in force. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than ten persons and not operated on a fixed route. The term "taxicab" means and includes the term "public vehicle." 
Taximeter means an instrument used in a vehicle for automatically showing the fare due. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, §§ 1—3, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 2002-19, 12-23-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-27. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 23, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-28. - Driver's license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a public vehicle in the city without having first obtained a professional driver's license as required by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 16, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-29. - Employment of unlicensed drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under this article to permit any vehicle operating pursuant thereto to be driven or operated by any person who is not the holder of a professional driver's license issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 6, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-30. - Inspection of vehicles. 
(a)  Every vehicle operated by a license holder under this article shall be inspected twice each year, at six-month intervals, by a certified auto mechanic, to determine the safety and fitness thereof for the service contemplated. Each driver of any taxicab shall at all times carry in such vehicle evidence of the results of the inspection, which he shall exhibit to any police officer of the city upon demand. 
(b)  Whenever it shall appear to the police department that the public vehicle covered by a license is not in good and sufficient mechanical condition, or has not such appliances attached thereto in good condition as are required by the laws of the state relating to motor vehicles, then the city may order such public vehicle withdrawn from service until the vehicle is placed in such condition as meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, §§ 21, 22, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 2007-03A, 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 23-31. - Failure to display license. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any public vehicle to fail to have the license issued under the provisions of this article attached to the motor vehicle in plain view as required by section 23-64. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 17(b), 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-32. - Posting of rates. 
There shall be posted in every vehicle for which a license is issued under this article, in full view of the passengers thereof, in plain conspicuous letters, the schedule of rates, charges and fares as required in this article and as set forth in the application for the license, which shall be binding upon the operator of the vehicle. Any collection of rates, fares or charges in excess thereof shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 19, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-33. - Solicitation of passengers. 
No public vehicle, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than at or upon a public vehicle stand designated or established by order of the chief of police and suitably marked by signs to appropriately designate the location thereof. The driver of any such vehicle shall not seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his vehicle to and from a short space before or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to and egress from any theater, hall, building, public resort or public gathering. Any driver may solicit employment by driving through any public street or place without stops, other than those due to obstruction of traffic, and may pass and repass before any theater, hall, public building or resort or any place of public gathering, provided that, after passing such place, he shall not turn and repass until he shall have gone a distance of two blocks upon the streets and highways of the city. No person shall solicit passengers for a public vehicle except from the driver's seat when sitting in his vehicle, and the solicitation of passengers by word of mouth or by any motion of the hands or feet is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 20, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-34. - Report of accidents. 
Every driver of a public vehicle shall immediately report fully in writing to the chief of police the time, place, cause and circumstances of any accident or injury to a passenger, person or property in which the public vehicle is involved. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 18, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-35. - Disposition of articles left in vehicle. 
Every article left in a public vehicle by a passenger shall be delivered and deposited at the city hall within 12 hours after the article is found by the driver or operator of such public vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 18, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-36. - Vehicle to be stopped while collecting fares or accepting or discharging passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any public vehicle to collect fares, make change or take on or discharge passengers while such public vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 17(a), 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-37. - Taximeters. 
If a flat rate structure is utilized, all vehicles for hire shall have affixed in a conspicuous place a taximeter in operating condition. The face of the taximeter shall be visible from the passenger compartment of every taxicab at all times. After sundown, the taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light so arranged as to throw a continuous steady light on the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, 12-23-2002; Ord. No. 2007-03A, 2-12-2007) 
Sec. 23-38. - Signs and identification. 
All taxicabs or vehicles for hire shall have a total of three signs on the vehicle at all times while in operation. Two of the signs shall be 18 inches x 12 inches located on the driver side door and the passenger side door and shall have the following information listed on the sign face: 
(1)  Name of the business 
(2)  Telephone number 
(3)  Location of business 
(4)  Fares for service 
The third sign shall be placed on the back of the bumper or trunk. This sign shall measure 30 inches x four inches. The following information shall be listed on this sign: 
(1)  Name of business 
(2)  Telephone number 
(Ord. No. 2002-19, 12-23-2002) 
Sec. 23-39. - Background checks. 
All drivers shall have a criminal background check complete with fingerprinting and be issued a city certificate before hauling any passengers. The fee for this service shall be the prevailing fee charged by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. Certificates shall only be issued to persons who have: 
(1)  Not been convicted of a felony unless five years have elapsed since the completion of the felony sentence; 
(2)  Not have been convicted of, entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond in lieu of, any sexual or other crime of moral turpitude within the past five years immediately prior to the application for a taxicab driver permit; 
(3)  Not have been classified as a habitual offended by the state department of public safety or any similar department of another state or of the United States for the five years immediately prior to the application for a taxicab driver permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03A, 2-12-2007) 
Secs. 23-40—23-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 23-56. - Required. 
Before any person shall be entitled to operate any public vehicle under the provisions of this article, he shall have first obtained a business license from the city showing that the present or future public convenience or necessity requires or will require such operations. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 8, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-57. - Application. 
(a)  All applications for a business license under this division must be prepared in writing and sworn to and filed personally by the applicant if a natural person, and by an officer of the corporation, if a corporation, with the city clerk. After a business license is once issued, it shall then not be necessary for such applicant to reapply for such license unless the license has been revoked by the city as provided in this division. The application shall specify the following matters: 
(1)  The name, age, residence and business address of the applicant, if the applicant is a natural person; if a corporation, its name, date of incorporation and the names of its officers and directors and their place of business; or, if a partnership or association, the names of the partners or persons composing the association, with the residence and business address of each partner or member of the association. 
(2)  The particular class of vehicles which the applicant proposes to operate. 
(3)  A schedule of the rates, fares and charges and a time schedule for the service proposed under the license. 
(b)  Applications for licenses may be filed at any time, in writing, with the city clerk. The application shall be verified by oath as to the truth of the statements therein contained, by the person making such application if the applicant is a natural person, by the officers of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation, and by a partner or member of the partnership or association if the applicant is a partnership or association. Such application shall set forth the following facts: 
(1)  That the application is made out in the name of the person, corporation, partnership or association. 
(2)  That all other things that are set out in the application for the business license are factual and that the applicant is the bona fide owner of the vehicles therein described. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, §§ 4, 11, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-58. - Liability insurance. 
No license for the operation of any taxi service shall be issued unless the holder of the license under which the service is allowed shall have first procured and filed with the city clerk a liability policy issued by a solvent insurance company authorized to write liability insurance in the state and the possessor of a certificate duly issued by the state treasurer, in an amount that is in accordance with all state laws and regulations which are applicable to the operation of taxi service. The policy shall include an endorsement to the effect that the policy cannot be cancelled for any cause without notice of such cancellation being served upon the city clerk at least 15 days prior to the date of such cancellation. The policy shall be in the generally accepted form in use in this state for liability insurance providing for public liability policies, and shall further provide that the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured shall not relieve the company from the payment of damages for injuries or death sustained or loss occasioned within the provisions of the policy, and that the prepayment of any judgment that may be recovered against the insured upon any claim covered by the policy shall not be a condition precedent to any right of action against the company upon the policy, but that the company shall be bound to the extent of its liability under the policy and shall pay and satisfy such judgment, and that an action may be maintained upon such judgment by the injured person or his heirs or personal representatives, as the case may be, to enforce the liability of the company as therein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 9, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-59. - Bond. 
The city council may, in its discretion, require the applicant for any business license under this division to deposit and have on file with the city a bond in such amount and upon such conditions as the city deems reasonable and proper to ensure the continued maintenance and operation of the rates, fares and services deemed necessary and proper from the issuance of any such business license. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 10, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-60. - Issuance. 
When the requirements set forth in this division have been complied with, the city clerk shall promptly consider the application for a license, and if all precedent qualifications have been met and the applicant is properly insured according to the provisions of this division, he shall cause the license applied for to be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 12, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-61. - Contents. 
Each business license issued under the provisions of this division shall contain the matters set forth in the application for such license, as well as such additional provisions and limitations as the city shall deem necessary and proper. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 5, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-62. - Transfer. 
No license issued under the provisions of this division may be assigned or transferred. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 5, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-63. - Numbering and filing of licenses. 
Each license issued by the city under this division shall be numbered in numerical order by the city clerk, who shall also make duplicates thereof and have the duplicates signed by the person in whose name the license is issued or his agent and file the duplicate in the records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 13, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-64. - Posting. 
Upon issuance of a license under this division, a duplicate thereof shall be securely placed in the vehicle for which issued, and shall be kept in plain view of the passengers riding therein and shall not be transferred to any other person or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 13, 11-14-88) 
Sec. 23-65. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city council may at any time for good cause shown, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given to the grantee of the license, suspend, alter, revoke or amend any license granted under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any suspension or revocation of a license shall require immediate discontinuance of service until such revocation or suspension is removed by the city. 
(c)  Upon the suspension or revocation of the license issued, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the holder of such license shall surrender the license to the city clerk upon demand therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, §§ 7, 14, 15, 11-14-88) 
Secs. 23-66—23-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES 

Sec. 23-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Kingsland Wrecker Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses generally known as and defined herein as wrecker services. To that end this article has been enacted in the interests of: 
(1)  Promoting the protection of the citizens of the city and surrounding areas; 
(2)  Promoting the protection of the wrecker when towing a wrecked or disabled vehicle for a fee; 
(3)  Promoting the integrity of the wrecker company, his/her employees; 
(4)  Ensuring fair dealings between all entities; and 
(5)  Establishment of the City of Kingsland Police Department wrecker rotational call list. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-103. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Car carrier. Any device for the transferring of automobiles utilizing a flatbed truck. 
Heavy duty wrecker. A wrecker with at least 25,000 pounds minimum G.V.W. rating equipped with a 16 to 25 ton P.T. mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels. 
Light duty wrecker. A wrecker with at least 10,000 pounds minimum G.V.W. rating equipped with an 8,000 pound P.T. mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels. 
Operator. Person owning the wrecker service and the wrecker service's agents and employees. 
Place of business. Defined as a structure maintained within the city limits of the city that is open to the public during normal business hours and manned by personnel. 
Wrecker. An automotive vehicle for hire equipped with hoisting apparatus and other equipment for towing wrecked automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" shall also include any other vehicle for hire which is equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or other type vehicles. 
Wrecker service. Any person who on a regular basis holds itself out to the general public in the city as being engaged solely or partially in the business of towing wrecked or disabled vehicles for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-104. - Application. 
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service to operate in the city without first registering with the police department. All vehicles shall be registered with the police department upon a form to be provided by the police department. Registration with the police department shall be done before the issuance of any city business license. Potential applicants must submit to and successfully pass a background investigation conducted by the Kingsland Police Department. The registration shall contain a minimum of the following information: 
(1)  Full name, address and phone number of applicant. 
(2)  The name of the wrecker service, address and phone number of same. 
(3)  The permit number issued to the wrecker service by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety and a copy of permit attached to the application. 
(4)  The city business license application. 
(5)  The number of wreckers owned by the wrecker service. 
(6)  The name of the insurance company and policy number with expiration date providing insurance to the wrecker service with a copy of same attached to the application. 
(7)  The type(s) of wreckers provided for service. 
(8)  A copy of the wrecker service's permit to operate emergency lights attached to the application. 
A registration shall not be assignable to any other person or other entity without the prior approval of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-105. - Safety vest requirement. 
All wrecker operators and their several assistants are each required to wear an outermost safety vest of no less than 200 square inches front and back in a color variously known as flame orange, hunter orange, or iridescent blazed orange. This safety vest must be worn at all times while supplying or participating in any wrecker services on any public street or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-106. - Required information to be printed on side of vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker to use or operate upon any of the streets, roadways, or bridges in the city unless such vehicle has in plain view the following information: the name of the business operating the wrecker service; address of the business; the current emergency light permit number. Temporary or removable magnetic signs will not be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-107. - Monitoring police calls; unauthorized soliciting of business. 
Wrecker service operators shall not monitor the county sheriff's department or local police department radio transmissions for the purpose of soliciting business at the scene of an accident, and no employee of the police department shall solicit business for any wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-108. - Records. 
Each wrecker service shall maintain a list of all vehicles towed and stored. This list shall contain information as to the make, model, year, color, VIN number, name of owner, and purpose for towing, removing, and storing the vehicle. Records shall be made available to the police department during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-109. - Rotational call list—Established. 
The police department will maintain a rotational call list of qualified wrecker services who meet the requirements of this article. All calls shall be on a rotational basis by name of the wrecker service; provided, however that the owner of the vehicle does not designate the wrecker service he prefers. If so, it will be the responsibility of the investigating officer to inform the police communications center of the request. The 911 center will notify the wrecker services of special requests or if on a rotational call basis. Any wrecker service not on the rotational call list shall not be called by the police communications center nor allowed to tow a wrecked vehicle from the scene of an accident or a police impoundment. If a wrecker service on the rotational call list is requested by the owner in possession of a vehicle, the answer of the request by a wrecker service will not be construed as interrupting that wrecker service's normal rotational position on the rotational call list. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-110. - Inventory of towed vehicles. 
Kingsland Police Department officers will adhere to department's policy of inventory of a vehicle. Upon completion of the inventory, the wrecker driver shall sign the inventory form in the presence of the officer. Upon completion, the wrecker driver will receive a copy of the inventory. The wrecker services company will then assume full responsibility for the vehicle and its contents. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-111. - Police department to be notified. 
All wrecker services who are on the city's rotational call list will notify the department of any vehicles that have been in storage for a period of five days or longer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-112. - Qualifications. 
In order for any wrecker service to be placed on the rotational call list, and be licensed under the provisions of this article, each wrecker service must comply with the following qualifications, standards and requirements of the article at all times: 
(1)  All wreckers must be registered with the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety. 
(2)  All wrecker services must have on file in the Kingsland Police Department, a current copy of their identification stamp, with the valid year; a registration permit issued by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety. 
(3)  The wrecker service shall have at least one light duty or one heavy duty wrecker in lawfully operational condition at all times to remain on the active rotation list. Each wrecker service shall immediately notify the 911 dispatch center whenever the wrecker service does not have a wrecker immediately available for a rotational call. A lack of prior notification by the wrecker service will be considered a rotation refusal. 
(4)  Each wrecker shall carry at all times when in service or use, a full complement of service items to include a fire extinguisher, chains, dollies, proper emergency reflectors, and other equipment needed for lifting, extricating, or righting wrecked vehicles and the removal of such vehicles by towing or carting. In addition, each wrecker shall be equipped with a broom, shovel and other equipment to clear traveled portions of the roadway. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall maintain and have access to a secured, fenced storage area for vehicles. The fence shall have a minimum height of not less than five feet, surrounding the perimeter of the storage area. Storage lots shall have sufficient night lighting. There shall be posted at the entrance to the parking area, a sign, the minimum size of which shall be 24 inches by 24 inches, painted white background with red letters, stating the towing charges, the storage rate per day and any additional information pertinent to the storage of vehicles. 
(6)  The wrecker service shall be available on a 24 hour seven day basis and have at least one wrecker driver on call at all times. The driver shall also be qualified under the state service commission rules and regulations. 
(7)  The wrecker service shall maintain in full force and effect at all times the following types and amounts of insurance: 
a.  Bodily injury: $300,000.00 per person; $500,000.00 per accident. 
b.  Property damage: $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident. 
All wrecker services shall furnish the police department with proof of such insurance. 
(8)  Each wrecker must be equipped with at least two amber lights mounted on the highest point on vehicle, along with proof of certification to operate emergency lights as per DPS standards. 
(9)  All wreckers must have painted or stenciled the permit number, issued by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety, on both sides of the cab or body, along with the wrecker service name and address. 
(10)  The wrecker service shall accept only those rotation calls from the police department which can be answered by arrival on the scene by that wrecker service within 20 minutes. 
a.  Lack of an immediately affirmative answer (i.e. answering machine, no answer at all, etc.) shall be deemed to be a rotation refusal resulting in loss of the rotational call. 
b.  A verbal refusal of a rotational call, for any reason, will result in the loss of that rotational call plus the next rotational call. 
c.  With the lack of a rotational response from the rotation list, any next available wrecker may be called by the 911 dispatch center to service the request. 
d.  Three or more refusals within a 60-day time period may result in the wrecker service being removed from the rotational list. 
(11)  All wrecker drivers called to the scene of an accident shall be responsible for the cleanup of all debris caused by the accident. If two or more wreckers are called, both operators shall be equally responsible for the cleanup. 
(12)  All wrecker drivers will possess the correct class driver's license that pertains to the type of wrecker that is being used. All drivers must possess a valid driver's license. A driving history will be provided to the Kingsland Police Department on every wrecker driver that is employed by the wrecker service on the rotation list. 
(13)  The wrecker service shall maintain a place of business, with full-time wrecker availability, within the city limits of the City of Kingsland. The purpose of this requirement is first to ensure that the wrecker has the capability of meeting subsection (10) of this section; and secondly, to limit the travel time and mileage incurred by the police department in examining stored vehicles in the completion of accident investigations and reports. 
Any complaint filed with the Kingsland Police Department about rates, damaged property or any other type incident will be investigated and may result in the removal of the wrecker service from the rotation list. 
(14)  All wrecker services will be responsible for any damage or missing property from vehicles which have been impounded for the Kingsland Police Department, while in their custody. 
(15)  All wreckers must submit to a yearly inspection by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety. 
(16)  All wrecker owners must submit a list of all wreckers, to include make, model, size, and vehicle identification number (VIN). In addition, absolutely no wrecker owner, with additional wreckers in other business names, may place these wreckers on the rotation list. Only one business name per owner will be allowed on the rotation list. 
(17)  All wrecker owner/operators will be prohibited from smoking at any accident scene or hazardous material scene, or respond to a call while under the influence of intoxicants. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-113. - Removal from rotational list. 
Any wrecker service violating the provisions of this article may be removed or suspended from the rotational call list by the chief of police or his designated representative. In lieu of removing the wrecker service from the rotational call list for minor violations of the provisions of the article, the chief, or his designated representative, may suspend the wrecker service for a period not exceed 30 days, during which the wrecker service will be removed from the rotational call list, except for request of an individual owner of the automobile. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-114. - Revocation of registration. 
The chief of police, after a thorough investigation, shall revoke the registration of any wrecker service on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the registration was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact. 
(2)  If the wrecker service or operator proceeds to the scene of an accident in violation of this article. 
(3)  If the wrecker service or operator uses a police radio to obtain information as to the location of the scene of an accident. 
(4)  If the wrecker service had been guilty of a violation of the provision of this article for a second time. 
Prior to the revocation of the registration of any wrecker service, the chief of police shall notify the wrecker service in writing within ten days from the date of his decision to revoke a registration. The wrecker service shall be given at least ten days' notice prior to revocation, together with a detailed list of all violations alleged against the wrecker service. Upon hearing the facts in which the wrecker service may present evidence, the chief of police may find that the alleged violation or violations have not been proven, in which event no further action will be taken. Such revocation shall terminate all authority and permission granted by the registration to the wrecker service. In the event of three suspensions within a 12-month period, any person whose registration has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a registration for a period of one year from the date of the last revocation. Any person whose registration has been revoked by the chief of police may file an appeal to the city manager within 20 days of the third revocation. The city manager shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the order of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-115. - Maximum charges allowed. 
No wrecker service shall charge more than the following fees for services provided when responding to a call received from the rotational call list: 
Maximum towing charge anywhere in the city limits of the City of Kingsland, day or night, to a single location ..... $165.00 
Storage per day, starting at 12:01 a.m. of the second calendar date following the tow date ..... 18.00 
Clean-up (if applicable) ..... 45.00 
A reasonable rate may be charged for recovery by winching when recovery is (1) over 25 feet from the edge of the roadway, or (2) out of water or marsh, and shall not include normal loading. To right an overturned vehicle shall be part of a normal tow and subject to the service charges set forth in this article. 
No additional charges for any other service relating to the towing or storage of a vehicle resulting from a response to a rotational call list request shall be allowed. The wrecker service charges set forth herein are maximum. The wrecker operator may charge less for any service should he choose to do so. 
Charges for any tow of a vehicle weighing 14,500 pounds or more are not limited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2008-17, 7-28-2008) 
Sec. 23-116. - Ramp-in period. 
Currently registered wrecker services who are not in compliance shall have a period of 90 days or at the discretion of the chief of police not to exceed six months to adhere to the requirements of this article commencing from the date of passage and approval of this act by the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Sec. 23-117. - Release of impounded/towed vehicles. 
Wrecker service owners and/or operators must receive a written and signed authorization release form from Kingsland Police Department. The authorization shall be signed by an officer of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-28-2005) 
Chapter 24 - WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; adoption of standard plumbing code, § 5-1(12); plumbing, § 5-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SHALLOW WELLS 

Sec. 24-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means a person licensed to install wells, pumps or plumbing equipment. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage owned by the city. 
Shallow well means a privately owned, drilled or bored well utilizing the local shallow sand aquifer, having a capacity of less than 100,000 gallons per day. 
Superintendent means the director of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Water supply system means the source, supply, storage, distribution, purification and pumping facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. I, 8-11-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 24-27. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall drill, bore or otherwise install a shallow well, or modify an existing shallow well, without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld if the applicant is in compliance with the terms and conditions contained in this article. 
(b)  Permits shall be applied for at city hall in person. A one-time permit fee shall accompany the application. Permits shall be renewable on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. II, §§ 1, 2, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-28. - Modification of existing wells. 
For purposes of this article, deepening or rehabilitation of an existing well shall be regarded as development of a new well. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. II, § 3, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-29. - Initial inspection. 
Shallow wells constructed or modified after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall not be operated until inspected by the superintendent or his designee and found in compliance with the provisions contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. II, § 4, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-30. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
The type, depth, size and location of a shallow well shall comply with all city codes, county health ordinances and regulations of the state department of human resources and department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. II, § 5, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-31. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to effects on the community water or sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work or inspections on private properties as provided in this section, the superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the contractor or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. V, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-32. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification identifying them as employees are authorized and empowered to serve written notice to any and all violators of this article, the notice to be delivered to the address shown on the request for the permit. 
(b)  All persons notified of violations of this article shall have a period of time not exceeding 30 days for the correction of the violation. An extension of 30 days may be granted in the discretion of the superintendent for bringing the well into compliance with this article. 
(c)  Persons who fail to make the appropriate corrections to bring the well into compliance with this article within the time limits provided in this section shall be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.00 per day for each day that the violation continues after the allotted time period for corrections. 
(d)  Violators who fail to bring their well into full compliance in the allotted time period as provided in this section may also have their permits revoked by the superintendent after opportunity for hearing, which hearing shall be requested by the person notified of the violation. The hearing shall be held within 30 days by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. VI, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-33. - Work to be done by licensed contractor. 
The drilling, boring or rehabilitation of a shallow well and the associated pipe work shall be done or installed by a licensed well driller or plumber. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. III, § 1, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-34. - Interconnections with city water system. 
No person shall make any interconnection between a shallow well system or its pumps, tanks or hoses and the city water supply system in any manner, through either temporary or permanent piping. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. III, § 2, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-35. - Minimum size of lot. 
No shallow well shall be permitted on a lot less than 10,000 square feet in size. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. IV, § 2, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-36. - Distance from sewers or septic tanks. 
No person may locate a well less than 50 feet from a septic tank or less than 100 feet from a septic tank absorption field or less than ten feet from a sewer. Greater distances from these type facilities may be required by the city due to topography and soil conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. IV, § 3, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-37. - Discharge of water to public sewers. 
No person may discharge any runoff, excess discharge or any flow whatsoever originating from a shallow well into facilities connecting with the city sewage treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. IV, § 5, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-38. - Use of water. 
A permitted shallow well shall be used for nonpotable outdoor purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. IV, § 1, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-39. - Piping water to other premises. 
No person may pipe water to another residence, business or facility. The permit issued under this article shall be for one individual's use only. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. IV, § 4, 8-11-82) 
Sec. 24-40. - Authority to prohibit use. 
(a)  The superintendent or his designee shall be authorized, upon written notice to all permit holders, to prohibit further use of all shallow wells when conditions are such that the public water supply for the city or the aquifer from which it draws is adversely affected in any way by the operation of the shallow wells. 
(b)  Any violations of any order issued under the emergency powers contained in this section shall be treated as are other violations provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-3, art. VII, 8-11-82) 
Chapter 25 - ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS PROTECTION 

Sec. 25-25. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This chapter will be known as the "City of Kingsland, Georgia Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate with the City of Kingsland, Georgia and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the City of Kingsland, Georgia and surrounding communities rely on as a source of public water. 
Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter. 
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: the "DRASTIC" methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluation of pollution susceptibility.) 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Recharge areas are determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Hydrologic Atlas 20, Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, prepared by the Natural Resources. 
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land area of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (current edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density or lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-27. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  The groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter. 
(b)  Determination of pollution susceptibility: each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-28. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Camden County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource for On-Site Sewage Management (hereafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-33-16(3)(k). 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimum set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3)(f). 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (Hereafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3)(g). 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50-[acre]-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five X ten-seven cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. (Georgia DHR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3)(e). 
(e)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided that comply with all federal requirements. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16(3)(d). 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types referenced in Sections 311/312 Hazardous Chemical Storage Reporting Requirements of the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA) and listed specifically in EPA's Title III Consolidated List of Chemical Subject to the Emergency Planning and Right to Know Act and Section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-29. - Exemptions. 
Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this chapter is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsections 46-223 (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-30. - Administration and enforcement. 
The provisions of the groundwater recharge areas protection ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the community planning and development director or building official for the City of Kingsland. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-31. - Penalty. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-32. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City of Kingsland Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006) 
Secs. 25-33—25-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 25-51. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This article will be known as Wetlands Protection ordinance of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
(b)  Purpose. The wetlands in the City of Kingsland are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. Nationally, a considerable number of these important resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare of our community. 
This chapter is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-52. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Generalized wetlands map : means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland : an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination : a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
Regulated activity : means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredge or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland : means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland protection district : means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland in Camden County, Georgia, as indicated on the wetlands map; provided however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-53. - Wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this ordinance does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-54. - Protection criteria. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the City of Kingsland, Camden County, Georgia. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city staff using the Generalized Wetlands Map, A U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the USACOE determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-55. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses shall be allowed as a right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoors passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be the pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural Best Management Practices are followed. 
(5)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-56. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste of other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-57. - Land disturbing activity and wetland protection. 
(a)  When wetlands assessment required. This section is intended to provide applicants for a land disturbing activities permit with notice when the proposed activity may require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE) permit due to impact upon jurisdictional wetlands. The provisions in the following paragraph of this section shall not apply if the applicant can provide to the city a valid USACOE wetland delineation that verifies that the proposed activity is not located within jurisdictional wetlands, or if the applicant can provide a valid USACOE permit or letter that authorizes the proposed activity within the jurisdictional wetlands. If such evidence of compliance with USACOE permitting requirements is provided, the city shall follow normal procedures for issuing a land disturbing permit. 
(b)  Wetlands Assessment. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbing activities permit the city shall assess whether the proposed activity could result in a disturbance of wetlands and, if so, shall also assess whether the proposed activity is located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district. 
(1)  If the city determines that the proposed activity could not result in a disturbance of wetlands or if the proposed activity is not located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district, the city shall follow normal procedures for issuing a land disturbing permit. 
(2)  If the city determines that the proposed activity could result in a disturbance of wetlands and that the proposed activity is located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district, a USACOE jurisdictional wetland determination shall be required prior to issuance of a land disturbing activities permit. No land disturbing permit will be issued without a USACOE permit or letter of approval. If the USACOE determines that the proposed activity would not require a USACOE permit, the city shall proceed with normal procedures for issuing a land disturbing permit. 
(3)  Wetlands inventories as identified in the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Camden County, Georgia do not necessarily represent jurisdictional wetlands within Camden County and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or wetlands delineation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-58. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of the wetlands protection ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the planning director or building director for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-59. - Penalty. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 25-60. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City of Kingsland Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006) 
Appendix A - KINGSLAND ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NUMBER: 2002-08 
ADOPTED AUGUST 12, 2002 
AMENDED BY COUNCIL ON JULY 23, 2007 
KINGSLAND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
This is an ordinance of the Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, establishing zoning districts and regulating the uses of land therein; specifying off-street parking and loading requirements; adopting general zoning regulations; describing zoning rules and regulations in said districts; defining said districts; providing for rezoning and redistricting; establishing certain building and zoning regulations in each of the said districts. The Georgia edition of all Standards Codes as adopted by the City Council on January 13, 2003 and the subdivision regulations as prepared by the City of Kingsland, Department of Community Planning and Development, and all subsequent amendments, shall be included herein by reference in this ordinance as if reproduced in their entirety; regulating land uses and accessory uses; prescribing the percentage of land area which may be occupied under varying circumstances; providing for variances and non-conforming uses; establishing a Planning Commission; providing for the subdivision of land; adopting general subdivision regulations; defining certain terms herein used; providing a method of administration and practice and procedure; providing penalties for a violation; providing remedies for enforcement hereof; to repeal all conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. In case of conflict with other ordinances, codes and regulations the more stringent shall apply. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county's zoning and land development ordinance adopted by Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted Aug. 12, 2002. Amendatory ordinances have been included in their proper places, and a history note following the affected section has been included. Absence of such a note indicates the section was derived unamended from the original 2002 ordinance. The term "section" appearing in the catchlines has been abbreviated as "Sec." Editorial emendations made for the sake of clarity are included in brackets [ ]. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without comment. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Kingsland, Georgia, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia 1983, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the municipality and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of the land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, hereby ordains and enacts into law an official Kingsland Zoning and Land Development Ordinance for the incorporated area of the City of Kingsland. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning and Land Development Ordinance for the City of Kingsland, Georgia." 
PART I - ZONING 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 30. - General. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, limited liability companies, or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel". The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". The word "zoning map" means the "Official Zoning Districts Map for the City of Kingsland, Georgia." 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 31. - Specific definitions. 
When used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this Section. 
(1)  ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental to the principal use of land. 
(2)  AIRPORT: A transportation terminal facility where aircraft take-off and land. 
(3)  AIRPORT LANDING AREA: The area of an airport used for landing, taking off or taxing the aircraft. 
(4)  ALLEY: A platted service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
(4a)  AMUSEMENT CENTER: means any freestanding privately owned and operated commercial recreational area containing an assortment of rides, games, arcades, attractions, water slides, and tracks for amusement vehicles. 
(5)  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand cleaning and washing, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repair, or automatic washing. 
(6)  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The crest elevation in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the one percent annual chance flood, i.e., the 100-Year Flood. 
(7)  BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Any owner-occupied building or portion thereof offering transient lodging accommodations and breakfast to not more than 12 guests where compensation is received. 
(8)  BLOCK: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
(9)  BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and/or by pre-arrangement, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. 
(10)  BOOKSTORE, ADULT: A regulated use which contains or is used for the display or sale of books, magazines, movie films, still pictures and any and all other written materials, photographic material, novelties, devices, and related sundry items, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphases on matters depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas", as defined herein, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material constituting a majority of its retail value of stock displayed for sale, or a majority of monthly gross receipts of the business. 
(11)  BUILDING: A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof impervious to weather and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. This definition shall not include tents, cabanas, truck bodies, school buses and vehicles of any kind situated on private property and serving in any way the function of a building. 
(12)  BUILDING ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building. 
(13)  BUILDING, ALTERATION OF: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, and girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use resulting from moving a building from one location to another. 
(14)  BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front to the height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 
(15)  BUILDING MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on which it is situated. 
(16)  BUILDING OFFICIAL OR INSPECTOR: The Director of Community Planning and Development. 
(17)  CLINIC: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
(18)  CLUB: Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 
(19)  COMMISSION: "The Kingsland Planning Commission". 
(20)  CONDOMINIUM: A form of individual ownership of a unit, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds in a development. (Georgia Condominium Act, Official Code of Georgia Annotated 44-3-70 et seq. 
(21)  CONVENTIONAL CONSTRUCTION: A building constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site. A conventional building is subject to local codes and ordinances. 
(22)  COUNCIL: "The Mayor and Council for the City of Kingsland, Georgia." 
(23)  CUT: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
(24)  DAY-CARE CENTER: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, or institution, or any other group wherein are received for pay seven (7) or more children under 17 years of age for group care, without transfer or custody, for more than four (4) hours and less than 24 hours per day. 
(25)  DAY-CARE HOME: Any place operated by any person who received for pay three (3) to six (6) children under 17 years of age for group care, without transfer or custody, for more than four (4) hours and less than 24 hours per day. 
(26)  DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations. 
(27)  DIRECTOR: The Director of the Community Planning and Development of the City of Kingsland. 
(28)  DISTRICT: A section of the City of Kingsland within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
(29)  DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
(30)  DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
(31)  DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
(32)  DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
(33)  EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, or a corporation or a certain person or persons. 
(34)  ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT, ADULT: A regulated use which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in person contact by employees, devices, equipment, or by personnel provided by the establishment; or where the patron views a series of dance routines, strip performances, or other gyrational choreography provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron of an establishment where the majority of the annual gross receipts are derived from such uses as herein defined. 
(35)  EROSION AND SEEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAT: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
(36)  EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(37)  FALL-OUT SHELTER: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fall-out, air raids, storms or other emergencies. 
(38)  FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single house keeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel, as herein defined. 
(39)  FILLING: The placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
(40)  FINISHED GRADE: The final grade or elevation of the ground surface forming the proposed design. 
(41)  FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) the overflow of inland waters; (b) the unusual and rapid accumulations or run off of surface waters from any source. 
(42)  FLOOD FRINGE AREA: That area of the flood plain lying outside the floodway but still within the area of special flood hazard, i.e., within the 100-Year Flood Plain. 
(43)  FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report may contain flood profiles as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary Flood-way Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(44)  FLOOD PLAIN: Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by waters of the one percent (1%) annual chance flood, i.e., the 100-Year Flood. 
(45)  FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the velocity waters of the regulatory flood. 
(46)  FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two building, but not including the attic space providing headroom of less than seven (7) feet; unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing; uncovered steps or fire escape; open porches; accessory water or cooling towers; accessory off-street parking spaces; and accessory off-street loading berths. 
(47)  FRONTAGE LOT: The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
(48)  FRONTAGE STREET: All the property on the side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or if the street is dead ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersection street and the dead end of the street. 
(49)  GARAGE, PARKING: A building or portion thereof designed or used for storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold, and in connection with may be performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repair. 
(50)  GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. A carport would be considered as a private garage. 
(51)  GARAGE, REPAIR: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping or hiring of motor driven vehicles. 
(52)  GRADING: Altering surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled combination. 
(53)  HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the main dwelling. 
(54)  HOTEL: A building in which lodging or board are provided for more than twenty (20) persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
(55)  INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING (ALSO FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING: A building or building component manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the Rules of the Commissioner of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereof. 
(56)  INSTITUTION: A non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment. 
(57)  JUNK YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded materials; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
(58)  KENNELS: Any location where raising, grooming, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes is carried on. 
(59)  KINDERGARTEN: A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four (4) through six (6) years; which operates for less than four (4) hours per day. 
(60)  LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. 
(61)  LAUNDROMAT: A business that provides home type washing, drying and/or ironing machines for hire. 
(62)  LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING, PICK UP: A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking up of laundry, such as establishments not having any equipment for processing of the laundry. 
(63)  LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and other carriers. 
(64)  LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more main buildings and its accessory buildings with such open parking spaces as are required by the provisions in this ordinance and having its frontage upon a public street or streets. 
(65)  LOT OF RECORD: A lot or parcel of land whose existence and location and dimensions have been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Camden County. 
(66)  LOT, CORNER: A lot having a frontage of two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
(67)  LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage of two (2) streets and distinguished from a corner lot. 
(68)  LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. 
(69)  LOWEST FLOOR: The floor, including basement, in a building which is the lowest elevation above mean sea level. 
(70)  MEAN SEA LEVEL: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. For purposes of this Ordinance the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(71)  MOBILE HOME (Also known as Manufactured Housing): A detached single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and constructed originally with wheels for movement (removal of wheels and placement on a foundation does not change its classification) and which has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(72)  MOBILE HOME PARK: Any tract of land that is approved by the Planning Commission for the renting of spaces for sleeping purposes or where spaces are set aside and offered for rent or use by mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes including any land, building, structure, or facility used by occupants of mobile homes on such premises. 
(73)  MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively. 
(74)  MOTEL: A building or group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally to the outside of the building. 
(75)  NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD): As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the flood plain. 
(76)  NATURAL GROUND SURFACE: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation of filling. 
(77)  NON-CONFORMING USE: A use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, or at the time of a Zoning Amendment and which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
(78)  NURSING HOME (REST HOME, CONVALESCENT): An establishment which provides full-time convalescent or chronic care or both for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill, or surgical or obstetrical services, shall be provided in such home; a hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included in this definition. 
(79)  OPEN SPACE: A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off street parking, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
(80)  PERMIT, LAND DISTURBING: The authorization necessary to begin a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(81)  PERSONAL CARE HOME: A building, group of buildings, facility, or place in which are provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals, and personal care, for non-family ambulatory adults. For the purposes of these regulations, personal care homes shall be classified as family personal care homes, group personal care homes, and congregate personal care homes. 
(82)  PERSONAL CARE HOMES, CONGREGATE: A personal care home which offers care to sixteen or more persons. 
(83)  PERSONAL CARE HOMES, FAMILY: A personal care home in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
(84)  PERSONAL CARE HOMES, GROUP: A personal care home in a residence or other type building or buildings, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through fifteen persons. 
(85)  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A parcel of land which is developed as an integrated unit under single ownership or control, which includes two or more main buildings and where the specific requirements of a given district may be modified and where the minimum area is fixed. 
(86)  PLAT: A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
(87)  PLAY SCHOOL: A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three (3) to four (4) years and which operates for less than four (4) hours a day. 
(88)  PRINCIPAL USE: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
(89)  PROFESSIONAL: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy" a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use which would create loud noise or noxious odors. 
(90)  REGULATED ADULT BUSINESS: Any building or structure or portion of any building or structure used or proposed to be used for an adult bookstore, adult entertainment establishment, or adult theater. 
(91)  REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION: For purposes of this Ordinance, the crest elevation in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the one percent (1%) flood (base flood elevation) plus two feet. 
(92)  RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: An eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor-driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 
(93)  RIGHT-OF-WAY: Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
(94)  RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a continuous street, railroad, or other public utility right-of-way. 
(95)  ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where lodging for three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons is provided with no meals served. 
(96)  SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity, as a product of erosion. 
(97)  SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments, planned, and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
(98)  SIGN: Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or marks, or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known, such as the designation of an individual, a firm, an association, a profession, a business, a commodity, or product which are visible from any public way and used as an outdoor display. 
(99)  SIGN AREA: The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof encompassing the entire advertising area, excluding architectural trim and structural supports. 
(100)  SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A structural poster panel or painted sign, either free-standing or attached to a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the premises upon which it is located. 
(101)  SIGN STRUCTURE: A structure composed of a single pole or multiple poles which is located on the ground on top of another structure and which supports no more than two (2) signs. 
(102)  SIGN STRUCTURE FACING: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited, not including architectural trim and structural supports. 
(103)  SITE PLAN: Drawing which puts forth the pattern in these dimensions of the activity, circulation and visual form to take place on a particular piece of land. 
(104)  SLOPE: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
(105)  SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: 
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, public region, (ii) buttocks and (iii) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(106)  SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: 
(a)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any acts of bestiality; 
(b)  fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or breasts of either male or female 
(c)  human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(106a)  SPORTS CENTER: means any freestanding privately owned and operated commercial recreational area containing ball fields, tennis courts, and/or other sports venues. 
(107)  STABILIZATION: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(108)  STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
(109)  STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(110)  STREET, HALF: A street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way widths as set forth in this Ordinance. 
(111)  STREET LINE: The legal line between street right-of-way and abutting property. 
(112)  STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(113)  STRUCTURAL PRACTICES: Soil and water conservation measures, other than vegetation, utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Including but not limited to riprap, sediment basin, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. 
(114)  SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined. 
(115)  SUBDIVISION: Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. This includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the municipality. 
(116)  SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: For a structure built prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any projects for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary. 
(117)  THEATER, ADULT: A regulated use for the viewing of performances or activities by others, whether such performances are in the form of live shows, motion pictures, slide shows, or other forms of photographic or visual display, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "Specified Sexual Activity" or "Specified Anatomical Areas", as defined herein, or any establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material constituting a majority of the annual gross receipts of the business. 
(118)  TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling unit which is erected in a row as part of a single building, on adjoined lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
(119)  TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses which is not more than eight feet in body width and is of any weight provided its body length does not exceed 32 feet. 
(119.5)  TURKEY SHOOT: A marksmanship contest using shotguns with a barrel length of 30 inches or less offering prizes and conducted as a charity fundraiser. 
(120)  VEGETATIVE PRACTICES: Measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment producing areas by covering soil with: (a) Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing long-term vegetative cover, or (b) short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover, or (c) sodding, covering areas with a turf or perennial sod-farming grass. 
(121)  WATERCOURSE: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto, subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(122)  YARD: A space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(123)  YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the right-of-way line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
(124)  YARD, REAR: An open space on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(125)  YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if no rear yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
(126)  ZONING ORDINANCE: The Zoning and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Kingsland. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2014-03, 3-31-2014; Ord. No. 2015-16, 10-26-2015 ; Ord. No. 2015-19, 12-28-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 40. - Division of the City of Kingsland into districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Kingsland, Georgia is divided into the following districts: 
R-1—Single-Family Residential District 
R-2—Low Density Residential District 
R-3—Medium & High Density Residential District 
R-4—Single-Family - Mobile Home 
R-5—Mobile Home Park 
R-6—Single-Family Large Tract Residential 
R-7—Townhouse Residential District 
C-1—Central Business District (CBD) 
C-2—Commercial District 
C-3—Unused - merged with C-2 
C-4—Interchange Commercial 
C-5—Neighborhood Commercial 
C-PLMU—Commercial-Planned Large Multi-Use District 
MU—Mixed Use 
I-L—Wholesale and Light Industrial District 
I-G—General Industrial District 
FT—Forest Transition 
FH—Flood Hazard District 
DD—Downtown Development District 
PD—Planned Unit Development 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2009-3, 4-27-2009; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 41. - Incorporation of the official zoning district map. 
The location and boundaries of zoning districts shall be shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning District Map of Kingsland, Georgia", hereinafter called Official Zoning District Map with all explanatory matter, references and other information shown thereon is hereby incorporated into and adopted as a part of this Ordinance and shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if all the matter herein. The Official Zoning District Map shall be signed by the Mayor and be attested by the City Clerk. The Official Zoning District Map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the Director of Community Planning and Development, where said map will be accessible to the general public. 
Sec. 42. - Zoning decision. 
Zoning decision means final legislative action by City Council which results in: 
42.1 The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
42.2 The adoption of an amendment to this Zoning and Land Development Ordinance which changes the text of this Ordinance; 
42.3 The adoption of an amendment to the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
42.4 The adoption of an amendment to the Zoning and Land Development which zones property to be annexed into the City of Kingsland; or 
42.5 The grant of a permit relating to the special use of property. 
Sec. 43. - Zoning map. 
If, in accordance with provisions of this Zoning and Land Development Ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the Official Zoning District Map, changes shall be made on the Official Zoning District Map promptly after the zoning decision has been approved by the Council, together with a numerical entry on the Official Zoning District Map referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and the brief description of the nature of the changes. 
Sec. 44. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply: 
44.1 Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, shorelines of streams, reservoirs or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
44.2 Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or right-of-way of the same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended such district, boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the Official Zoning District Map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning District Map. 
44.3. Where a district boundary line as appearing on the Official Zoning District Map decides a lot which is single ownership at the time of this enactment, the use classification of a larger portion may be extended to the remainder by the Council without recourse to amendment procedure. 
44.4. Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is revered shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
44.5. In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the Council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Except as hereinafter provided: 

Sec. 50. - Use. 
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
Sec. 51. - Building heights. 
No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered so as to exceed the height limit, to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 52. - Lots. 
No lot even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, inner, or outer courts, lot area per family or other requirements of this Ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use or when a lot is divided between the two adjacent lots so that the divided lot becomes part of the adjacent standard size lots. 
Sec. 53. - Yards. 
No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, and eaves, provided such projects shall not extend more than two (2) feet beyond the yard area requirements. 
Sec. 54. - Off-street automobile parking per district. 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use is established in accordance with this Ordinance. 
54.1. General Requirements. For the purpose of this Ordinance the following requirements are specified: 
54.1.1. The term "Off-street Parking Space" shall mean a space at least nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length with a minimum net area of one hundred and eighty (180) square feet, excluding area for egress and ingress and maneuverability of vehicles which has a paved or concrete surface. 
54.1.2. Handicapped Parking Spaces/Passenger Loading Zones: Parking Spaces/Passenger Loading Zones for Handicapped shall be provided as called for by the Standard Building Code, but in no event shall a handicap parking space be less than 11 feet wide, and each space shall be properly identified for handicap use. 
54.1.3. Parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the main buildings to be served, when feasible. 
54.1.4. If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Planning Commission may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 600 feet of the property line of such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
54.1.5. The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that portion of the parking space required for existing church whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
54.1.6. Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission. 
54.1.7. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
54.1.8. Off-street parking areas of 100 or more spaces, up to 30 percent of such required spaces may be stabilized and sodded rather than paved if not needed for extended daily usage. Such stabilized and sodded spaces shall be adequately marked or delineated by area and row and may not be counted as part of the required landscaping. In C-ED and C-PLMU Districts, parking areas of occasional use, such as outdoor theaters, event areas and seasonal events, 100 percent of spaces, exclusive of required handicap parking, may be stabilized and sodded as described above. Any drive serving more than 50 spaces, shall be paved at least 16 feet wide with at least 8 inches of base and at least 2 inches of asphalt. 
54.2. Parking Space Requirements for all Districts Except C-1, Central Business District (CBD). Off-street automobile storage or parking shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal in or to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 
Land Uses and Parking Requirements: 
54.2.1. Dwellings: 
(1) One and Two Families - Two (2) spaces for each unit. 
(2) Multiple - One and a half (1½) spaces per dwelling unit except for efficiency apartments for which one (1) space per dwelling unit shall be provided. 
(3) Hotels - One (1) space for each bedroom plus one (1) additional space for each five (5) employees. 
(4) Bed and Breakfast Inn - The resident owner shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each guest room. 
(5) Libraries, Museums - One (1) space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(6) Schools, including kindergartens, playschools, and any day care centers - One (1) space for each four (4) seats in assembly hall, or one (1) space for each employee, including five (5) spaces per classroom for high school and colleges. 
(7) Skating rinks, dance halls, exhibition halls, pool rooms and other places of amusement or assembly without fixed seating arrangements - One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(8) Bowling Alleys - Four (4) spaces for each alley. 
54.2.2. Health Facilities: 
(1) Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, homes for the aged and similar institutional uses - One (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees, including nurses. 
(2) Kennels and animal hospitals - A parking area equal to 30 percent of the total enclosed or covered area. 
(3) Medical, dental and health offices and clinics - One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor used for offices and similar purposes. 
(4) Mortuaries and funeral parlors - Five (5) spaces per parlor or chapel unit, or one (1) space per four (4) seats, whichever is greater. 
54.2.3. Businesses: 
(1) Automobile repair establishments - One (1) space for each regular employee plus one (1) space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
(2) Food stores - One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
(3) Restaurants, including bars, grills, diners, cafes, taverns, night clubs, lunch counters, and all similar dining and/or drinking establishments - One (1) space for each 100 square feet of floor area or one (1) space for each four (4) seats provided, whichever is greater. 
(4) Office buildings, including banks, businesses, commercial and professional offices and buildings, but excluding medical, dental and health offices and clinics - One (1) space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area, plus one (1) space for each 500 square feet of upper floor area. 
(5) General businesses, commercial or personal service establishments catering to the retail trade, but excluding food stores - One (1) space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(6) Governmental offices - One (1) space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area plus one (1) space for each 500 square feet of upper floor area and one (1) space for each governmental vehicle. 
(7) Shopping Centers - Seven (7) spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area for centers up to 15 acres in size and 5.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet for centers over 15 acres in size. 
(8) Furniture Stores - One (1) space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(9) Public Utilities, such as telephone exchanges and substations, radio and TV stations, and electric power and gas substations - A parking area equal to 25 percent of the gross floor area. 
54.2.4. Industries: 
(1) Commercial, manufacturing and industrial establishments, not catering to the retail trade - One (1) space for each three (3) employees on the maximum working shift, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(2) Wholesale establishments - One (1) space for every fifty (50) square feet of customer service area, plus two (2) spaces for each three (3) employees on the maximum working shift, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
54.3 Parking Space Requirements for C-1 Central Business District (CBD). All provisions set forth in Section 54.1 and 54.2 apply to the C-1 Central Business District (CBD) except as follows: 
54.3.1. Any commercial building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may be reconstructed, remodeled or enlarged without increasing the existing off-street parking provided such reconstruction, remodeling or enlargement does not exceed more than ten (10) percent of the original gross commercial floor area. Additional off-street parking must be provided for only that portion of the additional gross commercial floor area in excess of ten (10) percent in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Ordinance. 
54.3.2. Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the following specific land uses. 
54.4. Land Uses and Parking Requirements (C-1 CBD). 
(1) Restaurants, including cafes, grills, lunch counters and all similar dining establishments - One (1) space for each six (6) seats provided for patron use plus one (1) space for each 100 square feet of floor area provided for patron use but not containing seats. 
(2) Office buildings, including banks, business commercial, and professional offices and buildings, but excluding medical, dental and health offices and clinics - One (1) space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area plus one (1) space for each 500 square feet of upper floor area. 
(3) General businesses, commercial or personal service establishments catering to the retail trade, but excluding food stores - One (1) space for each 400 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only. 
(4) Government offices - One (1) space for each 500 square feet of gross area and one (1) space for each governmental vehicle. 
54.5. Site Requirements. All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
54.5.1. All such parking areas shall be hard surfaced with concrete or plant bituminous material and shall be maintained in dust-proof condition and that a good stand of grass be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
54.5.2. Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties. 
54.5.3. The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
54.5.4. Along the lot lines of the parking area which abut residential districts, a dense planting of trees and shrubs shall be established on strip of land not less than eight (8) feet in width adjacent to the districts, and provided that such planting be not less than six (6) feet in height and a substantial bumper rail of wood, metal or concrete shall be installed on the inside of the planting strip. 
54.5.5. A raised curb of at least six (6) inches shall be erected along all of the property lines, except for driveway openings, and those lot lines abutting residential districts where the requirements in Section 54.5.4 shall prevail. 
54.5.6. No sign, or other such objects whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2014-03, 3-31-2014; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 55. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be provided as hereinafter required by this Ordinance. 
55.1. Size of Off-Street Loading Spaces. Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 14 feet in height, 12 feet in width, and 55 feet in length; however, upon sufficient demonstration that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter trucks, the Planning Commission may reduce the minimum length accordingly to as little as 35 feet. 
55.2. Connection to Street or Alley. Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway which offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
55.3. Floor Area Over 10,000 Square Feet. There shall be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise, and having a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet, at least one (1) off-street loading space for each 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. Such space shall be so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
55.4. Floor Area Less than 10,000 Square Feet. There shall be provided for each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise and having a floor area of less than 10,000 square feet, sufficient off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by an adjacent establishment) so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street or alley. 
55.5. Bus and Trucking Terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
55.6. Location of Off-Street Loading Spaces. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
55.7. Permanent Reservation. Area reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which is served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 56. - Control of curb cuts and vision clearance. 
The requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
56.1. Curb Cuts. No curb cut shall exceed fifty (50) feet in length, nor shall curb cuts be closer than twenty (20) feet to other curb cuts or closer than twenty (20) feet to an intersection of two (2) streets measured along the curb line. Curb cuts along State rights-ofway shall meet current Department of Transportation standards. 
56.2. Vision Clearance. In all districts except C-1, Central Business District (CBD), no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee or other obstruction to vision may be placed on the property line right-of-way within twenty-five (25) feet of any street or a street intersection with a railroad line. Existing trees and landscaping may be permitted on the property line up to the right-of-way provided all obstructions to vision are removed between two and one-half (2½) and fifteen (15) feet from the ground. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 57. - Classification of streets. 
All streets in the City of Kingsland, Georgia are hereby divided into seven (7) classes as shown on the Official Street Map adopted by the council and on record in the office of the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
57.1. Freeways are those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic; and which are divided with full control of access and with no crossing at grade. 
57.2. Expressways are those highways or streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic; and which are divided with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections. 
57.3. Arterial Streets and Highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
57.4. Collector Streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of freeways, expressways, and arterial streets and highways. 
57.5. Minor or Local Residential Streets, including cul-de-sacs, are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
57.6. Minor or Local Commercial and Industrial Streets are those which are primarily for access to the abutting commercial and industrial properties. 
57.7. Alleys are those which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Sec. 58. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
58.1. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle per dwelling shall be permitted, the size of which shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck or van and is limited in size to a one-ton carrying capacity; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
58.2. Travel trailer, hauling trailers, or boat trailers shall be permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line. 
58.3. A travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel park authorized under this Ordinance. 
Sec. 59. - Screening and lighting. 
59.1. In any commercial or industrial district, any operation not conducted within a building, such as drive-in businesses, outdoor recreation, outdoor storage of materials, and outdoor servicing activities, shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six (6) feet in height where necessary to conceal such areas or facilities from a residential district adjoining or facing across a street in the rear or on the side of the principal building or use. 
59.2. In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening or buffering of a specified operation, such screen or buffer shall be a wall or fence of uniform material, solid in appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six (6) feet in height, as may be required by Kingsland Planning Commission. 
59.3. Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as to reflect away from all residential dwellings, and shall be so situated as not to reflect directly into any public right-of-way. 
59.4. Minimum Distance Between Buildings. 
The following minimum distances between buildings shall be required unless otherwise specified within this Ordinance. 
59.4.1. The minimum distance between main building located on the same lot or parcel shall be: 
Front to rear arrangement ..... 50 feet 
Front to front arrangement ..... 40 feet 
Rear to rear arrangement ..... 30 feet 
Side to side arrangement ..... 20 feet 
All other combinations ..... 20 feet 
59.4.2. There shall be a distance of not less than ten (10) feet between a main and an accessory building located on the same lot or parcel. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2008-05, 3-10-2008) 
ARTICLE VI. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 60. - Residential districts. 
60.1. R-1, Single-Family Residential Districts. 
60.1.1. Intent of District. This district is intended to be used for single-family residential areas with low population density. Additional permitted uses, by special exception, include related noncommercial, recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to the residential environment. 
60.1.2. Within R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Single-family dwelling. 
(2) Accessory building and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incidental thereto and provided the requirements in Section 82 are met. 
(3) Fall-out shelters provided the requirements in Section 83 are met. 
(4) Home swimming pool provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four (4) feet in height and provided approval from the Camden County Health Department has been obtained. 
(5) Public utility structures and building provided that the installation is properly screened. No office shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
(6) Dogs, cats and other common pets provided the requirements in Section 107 are met. 
60.1.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with Section 60.1: 
(1) Churches and related accessory building, provided they are located on a lot fronting on an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(2) Home occupations provided the requirements in Article XI are met. 
(3) Kindergarten, playschools and day care centers and homes. 
(4) Public and private schools, libraries, excluding business and trade schools. 
(5) Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
(6) Horses, ponies, and fowl provided the requirements in Section 107.1 are met. 
(7) Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry production, provided that the area available for said operation is not less than ten (10) acres, and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line, provided any such structure existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be allowed to extend to existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of such structure. All animals (except domestic animals, i.e. dog, cat) shall be kept in a structure or corral. 
(8) Satellite Dish Antennas provided the requirements in Section 130.2 are met. 
(9) Bed and Breakfast Inns provided the requirements of Section 130.3 are met. 
60.1.4. Prohibited Uses 
(1) Manufactured Housing 
60.2. R-2, Low Density Residential Districts. 
60.2.1 Intent of District. This is a residential district to provide for a medium population district. The district permits a mixture of dwelling types; and to situate these uses where they are well served by public and commercial services. 
60.2.2. Within the R-2 Low Density Residential Districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Any use permitted in an R-1 District. 
(2) Two-family dwelling (duplex). 
(3) Townhouses, provided the requirements in Section 81 are met. 
(4) Three family dwelling (triplex). 
60.2.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV: 
(1) Any use permitted by special exception in an R-1 District. 
(2) Family personal care homes subject to the rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources governing personal care comes. 
60.2.4. Prohibited Uses 
(1) Manufactured Housing 
60.3. R-3, Medium & High Residential District. 
60.3.1. Intent of District. This is a residential district to provide for high population density. The principal use of land may range from four family dwelling units to high density multiple family apartment uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. 
60.3.2. Within the R-3 Medium-High Density Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Any use permitted in R-2 except Single-Family Residences. 
(2) Multi-family dwellings including townhouses and apartments 
(3) Office buildings exclusively used for professional occupancy and of such character and nature that such use will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
(4) Accessory uses and structures 
60.3.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV: 
(1) Home Occupations provided the requirements in Section 110 are met. 
(2) Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, convalescent or nursing homes, including assisted living facilities. 
(3) Clubs and lodges, provided that food service facilities are limited to their members and guests. 
(4) Churches and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(5) Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers and homes. 
(6) Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purpose is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
(7) Public and private schools and libraries. 
(8) Family personal care homes subject to the rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources governing personal care homes. 
(9) Group personal care homes subject to the rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources governing personal care homes. 
(10) Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry production, provided that the area available for said operation is not less than ten (10) acres, and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line, provided any such structure existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be allowed to extend to existing portion of such structure. All animals (except domestic animals, i.e. dog, cat) shall be kept in a structure or corral. 
(11) Bed and Breakfast Inns provided the requirements in Section 130.3 are met. 
60.3.4. Prohibited Uses 
(1) Manufactured Housing 
60.4. R-4, Single Family - Mobile Home. 
60.4.1 Intent of District. The intent of this district is to provide permanent areas in the City exclusively for single-family residential mobile homes. 
60.4.2 Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in R-4, Single-Family Mobile Home Districts, shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1) Conventional single-family homes. 
(2) Single-family mobile homes on individual lots. 
(3) Parks and playgrounds. 
(4) General purpose farm or garden, but not the keeping of poultry or non-domestic animals. 
(5) Accessory uses and structures. 
60.4.3 Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XXIV and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1) Any special use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
60.5. R-5, Mobile Home Park. 
60.5.1 District Intent. The intent of this district is to provide sound and healthy residential areas to meet the unique needs of mobile home residents; to encourage the consolidation of mobile homes into parks; to protect mobile home residential areas from encroachment by incompatible uses; and to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for mobile homes in parks. 
60.5.2 Uses Permitted 
(1) Mobile Home Parks 
(2) Accessory uses and structures, including community centers and club house facilities, swimming pools, tennis courts, picnic areas, bike paths and other recreational facilities used to meet the needs of park residents. 
60.5.3 Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article VIII and Article XXIV, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
(1) Uses in keeping with the intent of district and which serve exclusively the residents of a particular mobile home park. 
60.6 R-6, Single-Family Large Tract Residential. 
60.6.1 Intent of District. It is the intent of this section that the R-6 large tract residential be developed for low density population. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and un-congested environment. Commercial, industrial and small lot residential uses are prohibited in order to protect the natural amenities of the area, as well as suppress urban sprawl. It is the purpose of this R-6 district to promote a compatibility between uses and to encourage and provide an orderly transition from agricultural to urban uses. 
60.6.2. Within R-6 Single-Family Large Tract Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Single-family dwelling. 
(2) Accessory building and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incidental thereto and provided the requirements in Section 82 are met. 
(3) Fall-out shelters provided the requirements in Section 83 are met. 
(4) Home swimming pool provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence of at least four (4) feet in height and provided approval from the Camden County Health Department has been obtained. 
(5) Public utility structures and building provided that the installation is properly screened. No office shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
(6) Dogs and cats provided the requirements in Section 107 are met. 
(7) Horses, ponies, and fowl provided the requirements in Section 107.1 are met. 
(8) Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry production, provided that the area available for said operation is not less than ten (10) acres, and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line, provided any such structure existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be allowed to extend to existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of such structure. All animals (except domestic animals, i.e. dog, cat) shall be kept in a structure or corral. 
60.6.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with Section 60.1: 
(1) Churches and related accessory building, provided they are located on a lot fronting on an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(2) Home occupations provided the requirements in Article XI are met. 
(3) Kindergarten, playschools and day care centers and homes. 
(4) Public and private schools, libraries, excluding business and trade schools. 
(5) Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
(6) Satellite Dish Antennas provided the requirements in Section 130.2 are met. 
(7) Bed and Breakfast Inns provided the requirements of Section 130.3 are met. 
(8) All other uses may be permitted as a special use approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXVI. 
60.6.4 Prohibited Uses. 
(1) Manufactured Housing. 
60.6.5 Conditional Uses. The following use may be permitted on a conditional basis in any R-6 Zoning District with approval by City Council. The applicant for R-6 zoning when requesting conditional uses shall submit a written report which shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development, and shall include, where applicable: 
(1) A general description of the proposal. 
(2) A legal description of the site. 
(3) Proposed standards for development, including: 
(a) Restrictions on the use of property. 
(b) Density, yard, and height requirement. 
(c) Restrictive covenants. 
(4) Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
(5) Exceptions or variations from the requirements of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance if any are being requested. 
(6) Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities. 
(7) Descriptions of percentage of land within the development to be provided for various uses: 
a) Residential 
b) Commercial 
c) Industrial 
d) Open space 
e) Utilities 
f) Parking and storage 
g) Others 
60.6.6 Other requests: If any of the following three (3) exemptions are requested a written report must be submitted with reasoning for these exemptions: 
1) Exemption from connecting to sewer provided extenuating circumstances are existing. 
2) Exemption from paving of roads provided extenuating circumstances exist and provided the following conditions are met: 
a. Swales must be engineered. 
b. Right-of-Way shall be a minimum of 60 feet 
c. Road width shall be no less than 20' 
d. Canopy height shall be a minimum of 15 feet high. 
e. Notes in the preliminary plat and final plat absolve the City of Kingsland from any maintenance of the roadways, ditches and/or swales and that they shall be maintained by the Home Owner's Association. 
f. Convenants and Restrictions are submitted with the plat and are reviewed but not adopted by Kingsland. 
3) Other conditions as the developer or Kingsland City Council deem relevant. 
60.7. R-7, Townhouse Residential District. 
60.7.1. Intent of District. This is a residential district to provide for high population density. The principal use of land may range from four family dwelling units to high density multiple family townhouses uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. 
60.7.2. Within the R-7 Townhouse Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Condominiums. 
(2) Townhouses. 
(3) Office buildings exclusively used for professional occupancy and of such character and nature that such use will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
60.7.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV: 
(1) Home Occupations provided the requirements in Section 110 are met. 
(2) Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, privately owned and operated community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purpose is located within 100 feet of any property line. 
60.7.4. Prohibited Uses 
(1) Manufactured Housing 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2008-28, 12-12-2008; Ord. No. 2009-09, 9-28-2009) 
Sec. 61. - Commercial districts. 
61.1. C-1, Central Business District (CBD). 
61.1.1. Intent of District. The intent of this district is to allow a more intense use of land within the Downtown Section of the City of Kingsland. 
61.1.2. Required Conditions. All business, servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, and the sale of automobile fuel at service stations. Uses, processes or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
(1) Any retail business or commercial use in which there is no processing or treatment of material goods, or products except as provided for, including: 
(a) Appliance stores, including radio and television service. 
(b) Art and antique shops. 
(c) Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) persons. 
(d) Banks and drive-in banks. 
(e) Bicycle stores. 
(f) Book, stationery, camera or photographic supply stores. 
(g) Confectionery stores. 
(h) Clothing, shoes, millinery, drygoods and notions. 
(i) Ice Cream Parlors. 
(j) Drug stores. 
(k) Furniture, home furnishings, including office furniture and equipment. 
(l) Florist, nursery and gift shop. 
(m) Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen, catering and super markets. 
(n) Hardware and paint stores. 
(o) Jewelry stores. 
(2) Any of the following service businesses: 
(a) Barber and beauty shops. 
(b) Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants. 
(c) Dress making and tailoring shops. 
(d) Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, including pick-up stations but not including self-service laundry. 
(e) Shoe repair shops. 
(f) Brewpubs and beer/wine pubs. 
(3) Office Building. 
(4) Fall-out shelters provided the requirements in Section 83 are met. 
(5) Signs as provided in Section 120. 
(6) Automobile service stations provided the requirements in Section 111 are met. 
(7) Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
(8) Public utility structures and buildings, including electric and natural gas, substations, telephone exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment or service operations when properly screened as required in Section 59. 
(9) Churches and other places of worship with attendant education and recreational buildings. 
(10) Private clubs, fraternal orders or lodges. 
(11) Commercial parking garages or lots provided no entrance or exit be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and the curb breaks be limited to two for each 100 feet of street frontage, each not to exceed 30 feet in width and not located closer than 20 feet to a street intersection. 
(12) Multi-family dwellings provided the requirements in the R-3 Residential District are met. 
(13) All uses of a predominantly retail nature, including: 
(14) Electrical supplies. 
(15) Heating and plumbing equipment. 
(16) Dairy products. 
(17) Bakeries. 
(18) Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories. 
(19) Sporting goods. 
(20) Farm and garden supplies. 
(21) Finance, insurance, and real estate office. 
(22) Public and private schools and libraries. 
(23) Hotels and motels. 
(24) Automobile sales (new and used), which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within a structure which shall not have any openings, other than windows, when facing a residential district or within 100 feet of a said district and provided that all vehicles on a used car lot be in operating condition at all times. 
(25) Amusement enterprises including the provision of stage entertainment. 
(26) Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums and dance halls. 
(27) Temporary uses, including sale of Christmas trees, carnival, church bazaars; but not including seasonal sale of fruits and vegetables from roadside stands, but such uses shall not be permitted for a period to exceed two months in any calendar year. 
(28) Open air markets. 
(29) Breweries limited to the manufacture of 10,000 barrels of malt beverage per year. 
61.1.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV: 
(1) Printing, blue printing, book binding, photostating, lithography and publishing establishments. 
(2) Satellite Dish Antennas, provided that the requirements in Section 130.2 are met. 
61.1.4. Prohibited Uses 
(1) Manufactured Housing 
61.2. C-2, General Commercial District. 
61.2.1. Intent of District. Within a C-2 General Commercial District, uses are restricted to those which are designed to serve the automobile, its passengers and highway users and to provide community shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and service facilities. 
61.2.2. Required Conditions. All businesses servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading, automobile parking for customers while on the premises, miniature golf courses, and the sale of automobiles or equipment employed shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. 
61.2.3. Within C-2 Highway Commercial District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) All uses permitted in a C-1 District. 
(2) Amusement enterprises, such as Miniature and Par-3 golf, golf driving ranges, skating rinks and similar enterprises but excluding "go-kart" type miniature auto racing track. 
(3) Automobile laundry or car wash provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machine and in addition that curb breaks be limited to two (2) each, not to exceed 20 feet to a street intersection. 
(4) Signs as provided in Section 120. 
(5) Bus stations. 
(6) Automobiles, travel trailers, and mobile home sales, automobile repair garages, mechanical and body, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any openings, other than a stationary window, within 100 feet of a residential district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such building. 
(7) Restaurants, including drive-in establishments, provided that such a drive-in establishment abuts a residential district by a six (6) foot high masonry wall and having no light shining directly into residential district. 
(8) Travel Trailer Parks, provided the requirements in Section 80 are met. 
(9) Truck Terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering and leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
(10) Theaters, including drive-in theaters, provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume of concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movements, and provided the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street located within 2,000 feet of such screen. 
(11) Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incidental thereto, provided the requirements in Section 82 are met. 
(12) Sale of souvenirs, gifts, novelties, pottery and sundries tailored to the tourist business. 
(13) Temporary use, including the sale of Christmas trees, carnivals, church bazaars, sale of seasonal fruit and vegetables from roadside stands, but such uses not permitted for a period to exceed four months in any calendar year. 
(14) Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided any structure of open area used for such purpose shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a residential district. 
(15) Ambulance service. 
(16) Boat sales, indoor and outdoor. 
(17) Bowling alleys. 
(18) Self-service laundry. 
(19) Shopping centers and/or malls. 
(20) Supermarkets, grocery stores. 
(21) Department and clothing stores. 
(22) Bicycle and motorcycle stores. 
(23) Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, convalescent, funeral homes, or nursing homes. 
(24) A zoning text amendment to add tattoo parlor as a permitted use within the C-2 General Commercial District. 
61.2.4. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXIV: 
1. Mini-warehouse storage provided the following requirements are met: 
a) No wholesale warehouse storage use or retail merchandise storage use shall be permitted. 
b) Site will be buffered form view along public highways and right-of-ways and where abutting residential area. 
c) General provisions of this Ordinance are met as specified in Article. 
d) Care facilities, to include (but not limited to) child day care, family day care, group day care, group day care, and similar care facilities. This use is conditioned upon (1) the property being properly fenced for the safety of those being cared for, and (2) there is suitable access in and out of the facility so as not to cause a traffic and/or safety hazard. 
2. Columbariums as an accessory use for fee simple churches. 
3. Turkey shoots when conducted from the last weekend in September through the last Saturday before Thanksgiving and firing only between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. at most. No alcohol sales or possession is allowed on the site during shoots. The site will be inspected for appropriateness by the Kingsland police before Planning Commission recommendation. Items to be considered include but shall not be limited to distance to roads, residences, and churches; and presence of berms or other barriers. Shorter allowed times and other conditions may be attached by the Planning Commission or City Council as part of the special exception. No firing will be permitted except on Fridays and Saturdays. 
61.3. C-3, deleted and merged with C-2 
61.4. C-4, Interchange Commercial. 
61.4.1. Intent of the District. The intent of this district is to allow more intense use of land within the I-95 Interchange areas of the City of Kingsland and is created to serve predominantly the needs of inter-regional traffic at interchanges on limited access thoroughfares. The uses allowed in this district should be limited to the needs of truckers and travelers, which are food, service, fuel and lodging. 
61.4.2. Permitted Uses. 
A. Property and buildings in C-4, Interchange Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1) Filling stations 
(2) Auto or truck repair shops 
(3) Restaurants and lounges 
(4) Hotels and motels 
(5) Gift shops 
(6) Tent and Trailer campgrounds 
(7) Accessory uses and structures incidental to the above uses. 
(8) Truck terminals as provided in Section 61.2.3 (13). 
(9) Satellite Dish Antennas, provided that the requirements in Section 130.2 are met. 
B. Special Permit Uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in 61.2.2., and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1) Churches 
(2) Banks 
(3) Professional and business offices 
(4) Plant nurseries 
C. Reserved 
D. Other Requirements 
(1) Uses permitted in C-4 Districts shall meet the standards set forth in pertaining to off-street parking, loading requirements. 
(2) Signs permitted in C-4 Zoning Districts shall meet the requirements set forth in Sign Ordinance and Regulations, Section 120. 
61.5. C-5, Neighborhood Convenience Center District 
61.5.1. Intent of District. The purpose of the C-5 Neighborhood Convenience Center District is to provide locations for small convenience shopping facilities. These facilities are intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of immediate surrounding populations. 
61.5.2. Required Condition. Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage must be within a completely enclosed building except that the Planning Commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. This district shall be limited to developments not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area and no single usage exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet. No two developments may be collocated. 
61.5.3 Permitted uses. 
(1) All uses permitted in a C-1 District. 
(2) Self-service laundry. 
(3) Signs as provided in Section 120. 
61.6. C-ED, Commercial-Entertainment District. 
61.6.1. Intent of the District. The intent of this district is to allow more intense use of land within the I-95 Interchange proximity areas of the City of Kingsland and is created to serve predominantly the needs of inter-regional destination attractions. The uses allowed in this district should be directed to the needs of tourists, travelers, convention attendees and others attracted to a destination entertainment, amusement, or sports venue. 
61.6.2. Permitted Uses. 
A. Property and buildings in C-ED, Commercial Entertainment District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1) Amusement centers 
(2) Sports centers 
(3) Other commercial recreation, including but not limited to zip lines, climbing walls, ropes courses, go carts, skating rinks, and miniature golf courses 
(4) Theaters, including outdoor theaters and stages 
(5) Event arenas and staging areas 
(6) Arcades/amusements 
(7) Food service establishments, including but not limited to full service establishments, fast food, and vending carts 
(8) Hotels and motels 
(9) Tent, trailer and recreation vehicle campgrounds for short term occupancy (less than 30 days) 
(10) Other tourist oriented lodging 
(11) Timeshare/fractional ownership units not intended for permanent housing 
(12) Convention, conference and banquet facilities 
(13) Bowling centers 
(14) Passenger carrying tethered helium balloons 
(15) Spas and wellness centers 
(16) Zoos, aviaries and other animal attractions 
(17) Art galleries and museums 
(18) Child care targeted for district visitor/employee families 
(19) Professional and business offices in support of operations within the district or adjacent districts 
(20) Maintenance and repair facilities in support of operations within the district or adjacent districts 
(21) Plant nurseries in support of operations within the district or adjacent districts 
(22) Retail and service shops that are ancillary to a hotel or motel or other amusement or sports center or campground 
(23) Retail establishments (book stores, clothing, specialty retail, confectionary, bakery, etc.) that are part of a planned and designated retail area within the district 
(24) Gift and souvenir shops 
(25) Sporting goods shops and stores 
(26) Farmers markets 
(27) Artisan shops and events 
(28) Media production and broadcast facilities 
(29) Accessory uses and structures incidental to the above uses. 
61.7. C-PLMU, Commercial-Planned Large Multi-Use District. 
61.7.1. Intent of the District. The intent of this district is to allow more intense use of land within the I-95 Interchange proximity areas of the City of Kingsland and is created to serve the needs of inter-regional destination attractions mixed with more local uses usually associated with metropolitan cities. The uses allowed in this district should be directed to the needs of tourists, travelers, convention attendees and others attracted to a destination entertainment, amusement, or sports venue or suburban metropolitan centers. Development should be planned in large units, not haphazardly. 
61.7.2. Permitted Uses. 
A. Property and buildings in C-PLMU, Commercial Planned Large Multi-Use District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1) Amusement centers. 
(2) Sports centers. 
(3) Other commercial recreation, including but not limited to zip lines, climbing walls, ropes courses, go carts, skating rinks, and miniature golf courses. 
(4) Theaters, including outdoor theaters and stages. 
(5) Event arenas and staging areas. 
(6) Arcades/amusements. 
(7) Food service establishments, including but not limited to full service establishments, fast food, and vending carts. 
(8) Convention, conference and banquet facilities. 
(9) Bowling centers. 
(10) Spas and wellness centers. 
(11) Zoos, aviaries and other animal attractions, but not standalone petting zoos. 
(12) Art galleries and museums. 
(13) Arboreta. 
(14) Child care. 
(15) Professional and business offices. 
(16) Maintenance and repair facilities in support of operations within the district or adjacent districts. 
(17) Plant nurseries in support of operations within the district or adjacent districts. 
(18) Shopping centers and/or malls. 
(19) Retail and service establishments (book stores, clothing, specialty retail, confectionary, bakery, etc.) that are part of a planned and designated retail area within the district. 
(20) Gift and souvenir shops. 
(21) Sporting goods shops and stores. 
(22) Farmers markets. 
(23) Artisan shops and events. 
(24) Media production and broadcast facilities. 
(25) Convenience stores and service stations. 
(26) Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories. 
(27) Automated automobile carwashes. 
(28) Public utility structures and buildings. 
(29) Churches and other places of worship. 
(30) Public and private educational facilities. 
(31) Hotels and motels. 
(32) Tent, trailer and recreation vehicle campgrounds for short term occupancy (less than 30 days). 
(33) Other tourist oriented lodging. 
(34) Timeshare/fractional ownership units not intended for permanent housing. 
(35) Multifamily housing. 
(36) Hospitals and clinics including veterinary hospitals and clinics. 
(37) Assisted living centers, nursing homes, and convalescent centers. 
(38) Parking structures. 
(39) Accessory uses and structures incidental and secondary to the above uses. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2009-3, 4-27-2009; Amend. of 7-26-2010; Ord. No. 2014-03, 3-31-2014; Ord. No. 2015-16, 10-26-2015 ; Ord. No. 2015-19, 12-28-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-08 , 8-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017) 
Sec. 62. - Wholesale and industrial districts. 
62.1. I-L, Wholesale and Light Industrial District. 
62.1.1. Intent of District. The I-L district is intended for wholesale and light industrial uses where resultant noise, odors, pollution, and congestion are minimized. Residential development is prohibited. This district is not suitable for heavy industrial uses. 
62.1.2. Within the I-L district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) All permitted uses in any City commercial district except that all new dwellings and all existing dwellings shall be a conforming use. 
(2) Adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, adult movie houses, adult entertainment. 
(3) Ice Plants. 
(4) Automobile, laundry or car washes provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 200 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machine and in addition that curb breaks be limited to two, each not to exceed 300 feet in width, and located not closer than 20 feet to an intersection. 
(5) Contractors storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building or fenced area as required in Section 59. 
(6) Building and lumber supply establishments provided entire storage areas are properly screened as required in Section 59, or of greater height as required to adequately screen such areas, and that any machine operations be conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any openings, other than windows, when facing a residential district or within 100 feet of said district. 
(7) Establishments for manufacturing, repair, assembly or processing, including: 
a. Confectionary and bakery. 
b. Clothing and garment manufacturing. 
c. Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis and photography processing. 
d. Manufacture and assembly of scientific, optical and electronic equipment. 
e. Manufacture of musical instruments and parts. 
f. Manufacture of souvenirs and novelties. 
g. Manufacture of toys, sporting and athletic goods. 
(8) Wholesale warehouses. 
(9) Drive-in theaters provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume in concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic, and provided that the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street located within 2,000 feet of such screen. 
(10) Truck terminals provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least 200 feet are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
(11) Auto auctions. 
(12) Development of natural resources including the removal of minerals and natural materials together with necessary building, machinery and appurtenances related thereto, provided: 
(a) Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence of a minimum height of three (3) feet located at least ten (10) feet back from the edge of any excavation. 
(b) The operators or owners of a new operation of the quarry shall present to the Director of Community Planning and Development comprehensive plans and proposals for the re-use of the property at the cessation of the quarry operation. Any extension of quarrying operations beyond the property lines actually being quarried at the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered as a new operation. 
(13) Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
(14) Bottling works for soft drinks. 
(15) Any other establishments for the manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing materials similar in nature to those listed in Section 62.1.2 (6) which are not objectionable by reason of smoke, dust, odors, bright lights, noise or vibrations, or which will not contribute to the congestion of traffic. 
(16) Special recreational facilities. 
(17) Satellite Dish Antennas, provided that the requirements in Section 130.2 are met 
62.2. I-G, General Industrial District. 
62.2.1. Intent of District. The intent of this district shall be to create and protect areas for industrial uses. 
62.2.2. Within the I-G, General Industrial District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) All permitted uses in I-L Wholesale and Light Industrial District. 
(2) Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry production, provided that the available area for said operation is not less than ten (10) acres in area, and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substances or use shall be located within 200 feet of a property line. All animals (except domestic animals, i.e. dog, cat) shall be kept in a structure or corral. 
(3) Dwellings, including a mobile home, for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use and subject to all dimensional and area requirements of the R-3 Multi-Family Residential District. 
(4) Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases but not when located within 500 feet of any residential district. 
(5) Food processing plants such as meat packing, fish and poultry houses. 
(6) Munitions manufacturing and storage thereof. 
(7) Satellite Dish Antennas, provided that the requirements in Section 130.2 are met 
62.2.3. The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the Mayor and Council upon recommendation by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 201 and Article XXIV: 
(1) Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair and servicing of any following commodity or product: 
(a) Manufacture of acetylene or storage thereof, acid, asbestos, ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine asphalt or products thereof, cement, lime gypsum or plaster of paris, coal tar or derivatives thereof, creosote or creosote treatment, clay, tile of verified products, emery cloth or sandpaper, fire works or storage thereof, fertilizer, glue, size or gelatine, linoleum, matches, paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish, rubber and gutta percha products, soda compounds. 
(b) Petroleum refining, tanning, curing storage of hides and skins; boiler works, foundry or forge operations; incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, dead animals, garbage or refuse; fat rendering; junk, iron, rags, storage and baling; distillation of bones, coal or wood. 
(c) Any use that may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration. 
(2) Junk yards provided the following provisions are met: 
(a) No such operation shall be permitted to locate closer than 300 feet to a residential district and no closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
(b) No such operation shall be permitted to locate on a State or Federal Highway. 
(c) All such operations shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence or wall, except driveway areas, having a minimum height of six (6) feet, but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view. 
(d) The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to one (1) per 500 feet with a maximum of 20 feet driveway width. 
(3) Sanitary landfills subject to the provisions of the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act and the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources governing solid waste management. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 63. - Special districts. 
63.1. FT, FOREST TRANSITION DISTRICT. 
63.1.1. Intent of District. This district is a large lot district intended for maintenance of existing primarily forestry and agricultural uses during their planning for transition to mixed urban uses. 
63.1.2. Within the FT, Forestry Transition District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) All forestry land uses, buildings and activities 
(2) Tree farms 
(3) Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges 
(4) Nurseries 
(5) Accessory buildings and structures 
(6) All other uses existing at time of rezoning provided none of these uses may be expanded. 
63.2. F. H. FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT (OVERLAY DISTRICT) 
63.2.1. Statement of Purpose: The purpose of the Flood Hazard District is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood at the time of initial construction; 
(3) Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion of flood damage; 
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(6) Protect the water quality of streams, rivers, other bodies of water. 
64.2.2. Objectives. The objectives of the Flood Hazard District are: 
(1) To promote human life and health; 
(2) To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control; 
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric lines, telephone lines, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the flood plain; 
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7) To insure that potential purchasers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
63.2.3. Lands to Which Flood Hazard District Regulations Apply. These regulations shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Kingsland, Georgia that lie within the boundaries of a Flood Hazard District. A Flood Hazard District shall be considered an overlay district to existing zoning districts. Uses allowed within the underlying zoning district shall be governed by these Flood Hazard District regulations. 
63.2.4. Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of Flood Hazard Districts located within the City of Kingsland, Georgia shall be determined by reference to the National Flood Insurance Program Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for the City of Kingsland, Georgia and the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Kingsland, Georgia, prepared by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, March 1977. Boundaries for construction or use restrictions set forth within the Flood Hazard District regulations shall be determined by scaling distances on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed in order to allow a surveyor to locate the exact boundaries of the district as shown on the map, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall initially make the necessary interpretation based on flood profile information, as contained in the Flood Insurance Study. 
63.2.5. Adoption of Flood Hazard Reports and Maps. The National Flood Insurance Program Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for the City of Kingsland, Georgia and the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Kingsland, Georgia, prepared by HUD, FIA, and dated June 1984 are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Kingsland Development Ordinance. 
63.2.6. Application of Flood Hazard District Regulations. Within the boundaries of any Flood Hazard District, no land may be used, cleared, filled or converted and no building or structure, or any part thereof, shall be constructed, moved, altered, used or occupied without full compliance with these regulations, except as provided herein, and/or the obtaining of a Zoning Compliance Permit as applicable. 
63.2.7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
These regulations do not imply that land outside the Flood Hazard District boundaries or uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the City of Kingsland or any officer or employee thereof on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
63.2.8. Establishment of Flood Hazard Districts. Those areas of the City of Kingsland, Georgia which have been designated as special Flood Hazard areas are the boundaries designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated June 1984. 
63.2.9. General Requirements for Flood Hard District. The provisions of this section shall apply to all Flood Hazard Districts. 
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement of structure; 
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(5) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges of the systems into flood waters; 
(6) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(7) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in these regulations. 
63.2.10 Flood Hazard District (FHD). 
63.2.10.1. General. Within a designated Flood Hazard District encroachment, new construction or substantial improvements shall be prohibited except as allowed in these regulations as a permitted use or a use by special exception. No fill shall be allowed. 
63.2.10.2. Permitted Uses. The following and other similar uses having a low flood damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the FHD, subject to the use regulation of the underlying district and provided they do not require structures, fill, dumping of materials or waste, or storage of materials or equipment. However, no use shall be permitted which would result in an increase in the regulatory flood elevation. 
(1) Agricultural uses, including general farming, pasture grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2) Non-structural, industrial and commercial uses, including loading areas, parking areas, and private airport landing strips. 
(3) Private and public recreational uses, including golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries for native species, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails. 
(4) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas. 
63.2.10.3. Uses Permitted by Special Exception. When, after review of the application and hearing thereon, the Council finds that the proposed use is consistent with the general plan and these flood plain regulations and in the public interest, the following may be permitted by special exception provided they are not prohibited by any other provision of this Ordinance. 
(1) Uses accessory to permitted uses of uses by special exception. 
(2) Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement or entertainment. 
(3) Drive-in Theaters and parking areas. 
(4) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines. 
(5) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials. 
(6) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves, exclusive of any structures connected with any of the above mentioned uses. 
(7) Other uses similar in nature. 
(8) New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure within the FHD shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(9) Prior to the framing of any structure allowed in the FHD, a certificate by a registered Civil Engineer certifying that the lowest floor elevation, including basements, has been constructed at an elevation at or above the regulatory flood elevation shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
(10) New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no less than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(11) Whenever it is proposed to raise the elevation of any parcel of land within a FHD by the use of fill, only fill from land lying totally within the FHD may be used. Any application submitted pursuant to this section shall be treated as an application for a special exception. 
(12) No new fill may be introduced onto any parcel of land lying within the FHD except as provided for in Section 63.2.11. The Commission, prior to approving any development in a FHD requiring fill, may require the developer to submit acceptable hydraulic studies, prepared by a Georgia State Registered Civil Engineer, indicating that the proposed fill would not overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood elevations on adjoining or adjacent properties (to include equivalent flow) and storage capacity can be replaced and maintained by the applicant, within the flood plain, as that term is defined in this Ordinance. Prior approval, where applicable, must be obtained from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers before any Zoning Compliance Permit allowing fill may be issued. 
63.2.11. Procedures for Application for Flood Hazard District Uses and Approval By Commission. 
63.2.11.1. In addition to the requirements set out in Section 63.2.9 to obtain a Zoning Compliance Permit for a special exception, the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Commission may require the applicant to furnish some of the following for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use: 
(1) A map, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the curvilinear line representing the base flood elevation and the regulatory flood elevation, dimensions of the lot, existing structures and uses on the lot and adjacent lots, soil type, natural protective barriers and, if applicable, existing flood control and erosion control works, existing drainage elevations and ground contours, location and elevation of existing streets, water supply and sanitary facilities, and other pertinent information. 
(2) A preliminary plan showing the approximate dimensions, elevation and nature of the proposed use, amount, area and type of proposed fill, area and nature of proposed grading or dredging, proposed alteration of natural protective barriers and, if applicable, proposed drainage facilities, proposed road, sewers, water, and other utilities, specifications for building construction, and materials included for flood proofing. 
(3) Complete hydraulic studies prepared by a currently licensed Georgia State Registered Civil Engineer evaluating, among other things, the total impact of the proposed development upon flood heights and velocities, threatened erosion, the adequacy of the flood and erosion, the adequacy of plans for flood and erosion protection, and the adequacy of drainage facilities. 
63.2.11.2. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall advise each applicant for a permit under the Flood Hazard District Regulations that, if required, the applicant will have to obtain same, prior to the issuance of a permit by the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
63.2.11.3. The Commission shall determine the specific flood or erosion hazard at the site and shall elevate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard and, if a permit is to be issued, may attach appropriate conditions. In passing upon such application, the Commission shall consider the technical evaluation of the engineer, all factors relevant and standards specified in other sections of this Ordinance, and: 
(1) The damage to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the prevention of disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions; 
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5) The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location; 
(6) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and that anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan; 
(9) The safety of access to and from the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and 
(10) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
63.2.11.4. After consideration of the factors listed above and for the purpose of these regulations, if the Commission approves the application it may attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
63.2.12. Notification. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, adjacent communities and the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia shall be notified by the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to any such alteration or relocation. Evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
63.2.13. Small Streams and Shallow Flooding Provision. Where small streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply: 
(1) No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five (5) times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or twenty (20) feet on each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a licensed Georgia State Registered Civil Engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2) The lowest floor, including basement, of all structures shall be at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade or at the elevation required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer after obtaining base flood data from a Federal, State, or local agency or engineer. All attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be flood proofed to the required elevation. 
63.2.14. Variances. No variances for construction below the regulatory flood elevation (two feet above base flood elevation) shall be granted. The Commission may, upon appeal in a specific case, grant a variance to Section 63.2.10.3.(12), which provides that no new fill is to be placed onto any parcel of land lying within the Flood Fringe District, provided the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1) A literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, and compliance with Section 63.2.10.3(12) would not be feasible; 
(2) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question which requires that fill be brought in from outside the Flood Fringe District in order to develop the subject property; 
(3) A variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public welfare and safety or impair the purposes of intent of these Flood Hazard District regulations; and 
(4) Base Flood data shall be provided on both the preliminary and final plats. 
63.3. Downtown development district. 
63.3.1. Intent of District. The intent of the Downtown Development District is to preserve the historical and architectural character of the downtown development area within the jurisdiction of the Architectural and Sign Control Board of Review. 
63.3.2. Superimposed District. This district is superimposed over other existing districts, and the special requirements of this district shall apply in addition to the requirements of the use district within which a specific property is located. Whenever there is a conflict between the regulations of the underlying zoning district and the regulations of the Downtown Development District, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
63.3.3. District Boundaries. The boundaries of the Downtown Development District shall be identical to the boundaries of the geographical area described in the resolution creating the Downtown Development Authority of the City of Kingsland. 
63.3.4. Permitted Uses. Any uses permitted within the underlying district shall be permitted within the Downtown Development District provided that a certificate of appropriateness has been issued for that use by the City Council. 
63.4. P D, planned unit development district. 
63.4.1. Intent of District. The purpose of a Planned Unit Development District is to offer developers the benefits of efficiency, economy, and flexibility by encouraging unified development of large sites, while deriving for the city the advantages of improved appearance, compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities and better handling of vehicular access and circulation. Review of development plan by the Planning Commission shall be in accordance with Section 71 of these regulations and shall assure that such large-scale developments are consistent with the objectives of the community's Comprehensive Plan. 
63.4.2. Within the P D, Planned Unit Development District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Residential District except that any public uses shall serve only the residents of the P D District. 
(2) Two-family dwellings (duplex). 
(3) Townhouses, provided that such uses comply with the requirements for townhouses as set forth in Section 81. 
(4) Multi-family dwellings. 
(5) Accessory uses, such as private garages and parking areas. 
(6) Retail and services uses limited to the following: 
Grocery, confectionary, bakery, newspaper, drug or hardware stores, barber, beauty, radio - T.V. repair, laundry pick-up or laundromat, watch repair or shoe repair establishment, or dentist, or similar professional office, provided that: 
(a) Only business signs are to be used. No neon or directly illuminated sign shall be used either on the exterior or in windows. 
All signs shall be attached flat to the face of the building. 
(b) Off-street parking and loading requirements as indicated in Article VII are met. 
(a) Retail and service users are designed for the service and convenience of the population living within the P. D. No more than five (5) percent of the total floor space of the project shall be used for retail or service establishments. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 64. - MU/mixed-used. 
64.1 Intent of District. It is the intent of this section that the MU Zoning District be developed and reserved for business, office, institutional, specified public, semi-public, and residential purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and un-congested environment for office type business or professional firms intermingled with dwellings and certain public or semi-public uses; and to discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns, or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial, institutional and housing character of the district. 
64.2 Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any MU Zoning District: 
1) Business involving the rendering of a personal service, specifically including: 
a) Barber shop, beauty shop or combination thereof. 
b) Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor. 
c) Funeral home or mortuary. 
d) Insurance agency. 
e) Jewelry and watch repair shop. 
f) Medical, dental, chiropractic or other medically oriented office, outpatient clinic and/or laboratory. 
g) Office building and office for governmental, business, professional or general purposes, but not including any storage, sale, rental or servicing of goods on the premises. 
h) Art studios except those that generate loud noise (i.e. wood shops, welding for sculptures) 
i) Clothing or shoe stores 
k) Real estate agency. 
l) School offering instruction in art, music, dancing, drama or similar cultural activity. 
m) Ice cream and/or sandwich shops 
n) Florist, nursery and gift shops 
2) One-family and two-family dwellings as regulated in R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoning District. 
3) Pharmacy, drug store, etc. 
4) All other uses may be permitted as a special use approved by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XXVI 
64.3 Prohibited Uses. Types of business which result in the following operations shall be prohibited in any MU Zoning District: 
1) Loud and offensive noise 
2) Hazardous materials or those that have an offensive odor 
3) Torches, gas products, welding, etc. 
64.4 Conditional Uses. The following use may be permitted on a conditional basis in any MU Zoning District. 
1) Combination of residential and commercial use on separate levels provided that all dwelling units have direct access to the abutting street or parking area. 
All businesses servicing, storage or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, as for example, off-street loading, and automobile parking for customers while on the premises, shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise or vibration. Other Requirements: Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
64.5 Uses permitted in MU Multi Use Districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
1) Parking: Uses permitted in MU Zoning Districts shall meet all standards set forth in Article V, pertaining to off-street parking, loading and other requirements. An additional two (2) parking spaces per residential dwelling within the MU Zoning district shall be explicitly reserved for the resident through the usage of signs measuring no more than 1' x 1' and standing 5' tall. 
2) Signs: Signs shall follow the regulations set forth in Article XII, but cannot be illuminated during the night if residential units exist. One wall sign per business shall not exceed 50 square feet is permitted 
3) Commercial Business Hours: Hours for businesses to be open for service in the MU Zoning District shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 
4) Accessibility: The residential unit(s) and commercial unit(s) shall not be accessed through the same door. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 65. - Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District. 
The Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District is hereby established. The purpose of establishing this overlay district is to protect the aesthetic and visual character of lands in the City of Kingsland adjacent to the herein delineated major existing and proposed roads. All development proposed within this District shall be subject to the procedures, standards, and guidelines specified in the following sections, in addition to those standards pertaining to the particular base zoning district in which the development occurs. In particular, the purpose of the Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District is to encourage and better articulate positive visual experiences along the City's major existing and proposed highways, as delineated herein, and to provide for the continued safe and efficient utilization of these roadways. This will be accomplished through evaluation of proposed developments within this overlay district by the Planning Commission (PC), which shall review the location, character and appearance of new developments in a positive manner. It is the purpose of such review to determine, in a cooperative fashion with the applicant, whether the proposed plan meets the guidelines and other standards of this overlay district. 
65.1 Delineation of Parkway Overlay District. The Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District shall include all lands within 500 feet of each side of the center line of the following road rights-of-way: 
Laurel Island Parkway—from Coleraine Road to County Road 78, but not including any C-4 zoned property within 1,000 feet of an I-95 ramp. 
The approximate boundary of this overlay district shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map and shall be shown as a surveyed line by the applicant on each property subject to PC review. 
65.2 Affected Development/Review by the Planning Commission. All development plan applications for development located in the Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. This includes all proposed commercial, residential, recreational or other type development. All changes subject to approval by the Commission shall receive such approval before proceeding. The Commission may also review preliminary development plans or design development drawings at the request of the Mayor and City Council or the applicant so that major redesign or final plan by the applicant shall not be necessary. 
65.3 Development Activity Permitted Within the District . 
1) There shall be no alteration of the existing condition of the lands, uses or structures within the Laurel Island Parkway Overlay District from the date of enactment of this section henceforth except as provided for by this section or by other sections of this Ordinance. 
65.4 Minimum Visual Buffer Standards. 
1) Retention of and/or creation of a Minimum Visual Buffer along the Corridor right-of-way: 
(a) Each approved application for development shall provide a minimum visual buffer between the right-of-way line of the subject roadway and all proposed structures and parking areas. The purpose of the Minimum Visual Buffer is to soften the appearance of structures and parking lots from the road, to screen vehicular headlight glare on and off site, and to lessen spillover light from on site lighting. The buffer shall be continuous, except as set forth in (b) below, and be no less than twenty feet (20') average and fifteen feet (15) minimum depth across the frontage of the property, such buffer being measured from the existing right-of-way line, or from the new right-of-way line should the application under consideration be required to or voluntarily provide a dedication of an easement for proposed roadway purposes. The fifteen foot (15') minimum depth shall not occur at the high activity areas of a project. These areas include but are not limited to: building entrances, drop-offs and drive-throughs. 
To determine the average depth of the Minimum Visual Buffer, measurements shall be taken at intervals not greater than 10 feet and perpendicular to the property line. Side buffer areas required by other sections of this Ordinance, and deep, narrow land areas, shall not be used when calculating the Minimum Visual Buffer. Where lagoons and drainage swales occupy a substantial portion of the Minimum Visual Buffer because of natural land forms or drainage patterns, additional buffer depth and/or vegetation may be required to achieve the visual softening requirement. If development is proposed for a platted lot which is part of a previously approved subdivision, and the size of the lot or the existing common road or utility system of the subdivision make strict adherence to these standards impractical, the Commission may relax the above standards for the buffer at lagoons and drainage swales as reasonably necessary to permit development which is otherwise consistent with the Land Development Ordinance. 
(b) The intent of the Minimum Visual Buffer is to leave the naturally occurring buffer vegetation intact for its softening effect. This buffer may be enhanced or created, where such vegetation is insufficient or nonexistent, with trees and shrubs of a variety and species appropriate to the City's character. If the Minimum Visual Buffer already has trees of protected size and species as noted in Section 140.6 of the Land Development Ordinance, their preservation is required. Where masses of native shrubs are present, their preservation with minimum disturbance is strongly encouraged. While complete screening of a project is not required, sufficient plant material shall be retained and/or installed to accomplish the softening effect required in (1) above. In order to maintain the screening effect, existing vegetation shall not be limbed-up from the ground more than five feet (5') to the lowest branches, provided that additional height may be permitted at intersections to achieve the sight standard as needed for appropriate vision clearance. However, if understory planting is planned, existing vegetation may, with the approval of the staff, be limbed-up to a height that will provide adequate sunlight to those plans. Minimum height and caliper of new trees shall be consistent with the provisions of the Landscape section of the Land Development Ordinance. Minimum height of new shrubs used to create the Minimum Visual Buffer shall be three feet (3') at installation. 
65.5 Permitted Activity in Minimum Visual Buffer Before and After Development. Within the Minimum Visual Buffer there shall be no development, clearing, grading or construction activity with the following exceptions: 
(a) Roadway and/or access to the portion of the site not in the Minimum Visual Buffer provided that it is approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way. 
(b) Provision for water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electrical, telephone, natural gas, cable, etc., service lines provided they are approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way. In the event that utilities must be installed approximately parallel to the road right-of-way, an equal amount of buffer may be required to substitute for the area of vegetation removal. Permission for easement and right-of-way disturbance and clearings for such services shall be more favorably considered when such activity is consolidated with vehicular access routes. 
(c) Pedestrian and bicycle paths designed to provide continuous connection along the road corridor, provided that they can be constructed without materially reducing the screening and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer. 
(d) Lighting fixtures which comply with the appropriate sections of this Ordinance for approved signs only or if, for safety reasons, they cannot be placed outside the buffer and then only when electric utility lines serving these fixtures and necessary easements can be established and constructed without significantly reducing the screening and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer. 
(e) Signs in accordance with the sign regulations delineated herein. 
(f) Clear sight distances at the permitted entrances and exists to any development as needed to provide for reasonable traffic safety, in accordance with accepted traffic engineering practices of the State of Georgia and the City of Kingsland. 
(g) The addition of plantings, earth forms or other visual buffers which, in the opinion of the Commission, would better achieve the purpose set out in subsection (a) than would otherwise be the case. 
(h) Large work area doors or open bays shall be constructed in such a manner that the structure will not directly face Laurel Island Parkway. Screening of these doors should be incorporated with the construction plans for any doors facing other road rights-of-way. 
(i) Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning equipment, cut work, air compressors, and other fixed operating machinery shall be either screened from view or located so that such items are not visible from the highway. Trash receptacles, dumpsters, utility meters, above-ground tanks, etc., shall be similarly treated. 
(j) No temporary structures are permitted except those in conjunction with and during construction projects. 
(k) Large unbroken parking and drive areas exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet are not permitted. Separation strips and parking islands shall be used and contain natural or planted trees and shrubs. 
(l) The number of parking spaces shall be as required in the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. There shall be a maximum of eight (8) spaces in a single row with a nine (9) foot by eighteen (18) foot island separating each eight or fewer space groups. The retention of original trees is encouraged in the islands. 
(m) Parking Lot Islands. When islands are required in parking lots, each island shall include (a) shade tree not less than ten (10) feet in height. The preservation of existing trees in parking islands is encouraged. 
65.6 General Sign Standards. 
1. If illuminated, signs shall be illuminated only by the following means: 
(a) By a white, steady stationary light of reasonable intensity shielded and directed solely at the sign. 
(b) Light sources to illuminate signs shall be shielded from all adjacent residential buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers or so as to create a nuisance to adjacent residential districts. 
2. Material and Style . 
(a) Signs shall not have light-reflecting backgrounds but may use light-reflecting lettering. 
(b) The various parts of a sign shall be compatible. 
(c) Any multi-faced sign shall have the same name and same message on all used faces. 
(d) All signs shall be of standard geometric shapes. 
(e) Signs shall not be of or contain a commercial sponsor name or motif (soda bottles, hamburgers, or other figures) or other outdoor commercial displays. 
3. Dimension and Quantity. 
(a) Area and Quantity . The area and quantity of any sign face shall conform with the following: 
(i) Major residential development consisting of more than five hundred (500) dwelling units shall be permitted one free-standing sign per entrance with not more than two hundred forty (240) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(ii) Secondary residential development consisting of five hundred (500) dwelling units or less, but more than three hundred (300) dwelling units shall be permitted one free-standing sign per entrance with not more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed eighty (80) square feet. 
(iii) Minor residential development consisting of three hundred (300) dwelling units or less shall be permitted one free-standing sign per entrance with not more than eighty (80) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet. 
(iv) Major commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, either exclusively or mixed with residential uses, which contain more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of heated floor space open to the public shall not have more than two hundred forty (240) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(v) Secondary commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, either exclusively or mixed with residential uses, which contain one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or less, but more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one free-standing sign per entrance but no more than two (2) identification signs for the development. Said signs shall not have more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed eighty (80) square feet, excepting that if the commercial use herein is mixed with residential use which exceeds five hundred (500) dwelling units, the provisions of sub-paragraph (a) shall apply to said development. 
(vi) Minor commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses, either exclusively or mixed with residential uses, which contains forty thousand (40,000) square feet or less, but more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one free-standing sign per entrance, but no more than two (2) identifications signs for the development, with not more than eighty (80) square feet of sign face per sign equally divided among not more than four (4) sign faces. No single sign face shall exceed forty (40) square feet, excepting that if the commercial use herein is mixed with residential use which exceeds three hundred (300) dwelling units, the provisions of subparagraph (i) or (ii) shall apply, as the case may be. 
(vii) A commercial development consisting of retail and public commercial uses which contains two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less of heated floor space open to the public shall be permitted one free-standing sign. Said sign shall have not more than forty (40) square feet of sign face equally divided between not more than two (2) sign faces. If an applicant in this category shall waive the right to have a free-standing sign, the applicant shall be permitted to exceed the building sign, wall graphics, and window graphics limitations of sub-paragraph (6), "Special Sign Standards" below by fifty percent (50%). 
Developments, which because of their composition may qualify for more than one of the above categories, may select the single category that provides them the largest sign. The above categories shall not be cumulative. 
(b) Height . The maximum height of any free-standing sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet above the average elevation of the nearest public highway. The bottom edge of the sign face shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from average grade. 
(c) Width . The maximum width of the entire sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(d) Structure Size . The size of the support structure for any free standing sign shall not exceed the sign face by more than 100%. 
65.7 Special Sign Standards. 
1. On-Premise Sign Standards: 
(a) Building and wall signs shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the signable space on any one facade of a building with a maximum size of the sign limited to forty (40) square feet. 
(b) Window graphics, which otherwise comply with this article, may be displayed provided no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of a window may be occupied by signage. 
(c) Free-standing signs on any premises shall be spaced at minimum two hundred (200) feet intervals along each public way which views the premises. In the event that less than two hundred (200) feet of any premise is visible from any one public way, only one sign shall be permitted along that public way, notwithstanding that a greater number of signs may be permitted by Section 121 "General Sign Standards", sub-paragraph _______. 
(d) Obstruction. An on-premise sign shall be erected so as to not obstruct or impair driver vision at business ingress-egress point and intersections. 
65.8 Temporary Signs and Standards. 
1. Types: The following types of signs are classified as "Temporary Signs": 
a. Special event signs. 
b. "Grand Opening, "Going Out of Business" and "Sale" signs of businesses or services. 
c. Signs for work under construction. 
d. Land subdivision or development signs. 
e. Signs advertising the sale or lease of property upon which they are located. 
2. Area, Height, Location: 
a. Area: The total area of temporary signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and twenty (20) square feet per sign face, except for real estate signs for residential property, which shall not exceed the limitations of Section 8 "Real Estate Signs". 
b. Height: The maximum height of temporary signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet, while the lower edge shall not exceed four (4) feet in height from the average grade. 
c. Location: 
(a) No temporary sign shall be located so as to obstruct or impair driver vision at business ingress-egress points or intersections. 
(b) No temporary sign shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any church, cemetery, public building, historic site or district, and intersection of two (2) or more public streets or highways. 
(c) Temporary signs are not to be located any closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other sign on the same premises. 
65.9 Time Limits. 
1) "Special Event" Signs: Special event signs may be erected no sooner than fourteen (14) days preceding a special event and shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours following the special event. The same or similar special event shall not be advertised more frequently than four (4) times a year. 
2) "Grand Opening" Signs: Temporary "grand opening signs" shall be erected for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days. 
3) "Going-Out-of-Business" and "Sale" Signs: "Going-out of business" and "sale" signs may be erected for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for "going-out-of-business" signs and fourteen (14) days for "sale" signs. 
4) "Project" Signs: Signs for work under construction may be erected upon the issuance of a final development permit on the construction site during the construction and shall be removed within seven (7) days following the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
5) Signs announcing the subdivision of land: Temporary signs announcing the subdivision of land may be erected on the land being developed and shall be removed when one hundred percent (100%) of the development lots are conveyed, or for the term not to exceed six (6) months, whichever comes first. An extension may be permitted by the Community Development Director. 
6) Removal: Signs advertising the sale or lease of property shall be removed at the completion of the transaction advertised or for a term not to exceed six (6) months, whichever comes sooner. An extension may be permitted by the Community Development Director. 
7) Permits: Unless specifically exempted, a temporary sign is subject to the permit requirements of this section. 
65.10 Real Estate Signs. One commercial real estate sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area per face and, if free-standing, not exceeding four (4) square feet in height shall be permitted. Property with two (2) or more on-premise frontages shall be permitted one additional sign per frontage. 
65.11 Canopy Signs. A commercial center shall be permitted one canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed six (6) feet in length and eighteen (18) inches in height, placed entirely under a canopy (marquee) directly in front of said location, identifying the occupancy. 
65.12 Multiple-Use Shopping, Business, Office and Professional Centers; Free Standing Directory Signs. 
1) Any multiple-use shopping, business, office and professional center or mall shall be allowed to have not more than two (2) free-standing directory signs for individual businesses provided they meet the following requirements: 
a. Information: Signs shall be for director information purposes only. 
b. Location: Either the area of the directory sign shall be contained within the limits for total signage area at said center or mall or the sign shall not be visible from any public way. 
c. Free standing signs on outlying parcels that do not have direct traffic access to the adjacent roadway will be permitted a sign ½ the size authorized in Section 5 "General Sign Standards". 
65.13 Gasoline Filling Stations. 
(1) Petroleum products, pumps and dispensers which are within view of a public way shall be permitted to display only information required by law and in addition, the brand name and type of product being dispensed. 
(2) Premises which dispense retail bulk petroleum products by pump shall be permitted one additional sign on the premises announcing the price per gallon of no more than four (4) products with characters not exceeding twelve (12) inches in height. In lieu of the one additional sign permitted above, the price per gallon may be displayed on each individual pump structure with character not exceeding six (6) inches in height. 
65.14 Flags . 
(1) Non-governmental flags are deemed to be subject to the provisions of this article except that no such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet per face. 
(2) Governmental flags must be displayed in a dignified noncommercial manner. No such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet per face. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, 9-22-2014) 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 70. - Minimum lot area, lot width, required yards, maximum building height and maximum lot coverage. 
Within each district the following minimum lot areas, minimum lot widths, minimum yard requirements, maximum height requirements, and maximum lot coverages shall apply unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance: 
70.1. Residential Districts. 
70.1.1. R-1 Single Family Residential 
1 Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet 
2 Minimum lot width at the building line: 75 feet 
3 Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet 
4 Minimum side yard setback from street: 25 feet setback from other property line: 10 feet 
5 Minimum rear yard setback from street: 25 feet setback from other property line: 15 feet 
6 Maximum building height: 35 feet 
70.1.2. R-2 Low Density Residential 
1. Minimum lot area: 
a. Single-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet 
b. Two and three family dwellings: 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit 
c. Townhouses: 10,000 square feet for the first three units, plus 4,000 square feet for each additional unit. 
1 Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet 
2 Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet 
3 Minimum side yard setback from street: 25 feet setback from other property line: 10 feet 
4 Minimum rear yard setback from other property line: 15 feet 
5 Maximum percentage of lot coverage 35 feet 
6 Maximum building height: 35 feet 
7 Minimum dwelling unit size (heated area): 
a. Single-family dwellings: None 
b. Two and three family dwellings: 600 square feet per unit 
c. Townhouses: None 
70.1.3 R-3, Medium and High Density Multi-Family Residential District 
(1) Minimum lot area: 
(a) Two and three family dwellings: 4,000 square feet per unit. 
(b) Multi-family dwellings of more than three units: 
8,000 square feet for the first two units; plus 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. 
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a) Condominium and Apartment Developments: 70 feet 
(b) Townhouses: 60 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard: 
(a) Apartments/ condominiums, setback from street: 25 feet Setback from other property line: 10 feet 
(b) Townhouses, setback from street: 25 feet 
Setback from other property not a part of the townhouse building: 10 feet 
(5) Minimum rear yard setback from street: 25 feet Setback from other property line: 15 feet 
(6) Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 35% 
(7) Maximum building height: 45 feet or 3 stories 
(8) Minimum dwelling unit size: 
(a) Two and three family dwellings: 600 square feet per unit 
(b) Multi-family dwelling of more than three units: 600 square feet for the first six (6) units; 500 square feet for the next six (6) units; and 400 square feet per unit in addition to the first twelve (12) units. 
70.1.4. R-4, Single-Family Mobile Home District 
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet 
(2) Minimum lot width at the building line: 50 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard setback from street: 25 feet Setback from other property line: 10 feet 
(5) Minimum rear yard setback from street: 25 feet Setback from other property line: 15 feet 
(6) Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 30% 
(7) Maximum building height: 20 feet 
70.1.5 R-5, Mobile Home Park District 
1 Minimum lot area: Five (5) acres 
2 Maximum density: Seven (7) mobile homes per acre. 
3 Minimum space area: Each mobile home shall be located on a lot or space having an area of at least 4,000 square feet. 
4. Mobile Home Placement and Separation. The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile home shall be: 
20 feet from side to side; 20 feet from side to rear; 15 feet from rear to rear; setback from interior driveways shall be at least 15 feet. Mobile home placement for sale centers on Highway 40 E. shall have a minimum setback of 25' from the front property line. 
5 No mobile home shall be located closer than 30 feet from street right-of-way lines and not closer than 20 feet from property line. 
70.1.6. R-6 Single-Family Large Tract Residential District 
1 Minimum lot area: 1.5 Acres 
2 Minimum lot width at the building line: 100 feet 
3 Minimum front yard setback from property line: 30 feet 
4 Minimum side yard setback from property line: 20 feet setback from corner street property line: 25 feet 
5. Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 30 feet setback from rear street property line: 20 feet 
6 Maximum building height: 35 feet 
7 Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 40 percent 
8 Minimum subdivision size: 100 Acres 
70.1.7. R-7 Townhouse Residential District 
1 Minimum lot area: 1600 square feet 
2 Minimum lot width at the building line: 16 feet 
3 Minimum front yard setback from property line: 15 feet 
4 Minimum side yard setback from property line: 0 feet setback from corner street property line: 25 feet 
5. Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 25 feet setback from rear street (not alley) property line: 30 feet 
6 Maximum building height: 35 feet 
7 Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent 
70.2. Commercial Districts. 
70.2.1. C-1, Central Business District 
(1) Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet 
(2) Minimum lot width: 30 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback: None; however, public walkways shall be accessible. 
(4) Minimum side yard: None, unless the parcel is adjacent to a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard shall be 15 feet. 
(5) Minimum rear yard: None, unless the parcel is adjacent to a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet. 
(6) Maximum percentage of lot coverage: None, except for new construction where setbacks must be presented. 
(7) Maximum building height: 45 feet 
70.2.2. C-2, Highway Commercial District 
(1) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet 
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback from King Avenue (S.R. 40): 40 feet {from right-of-way}; From other public rights-of-way: 25 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard setback from property line of similar uses: 7 feet 
From street rights-of-way: 25 feet 
From property lines abutting existing residential uses: 15 feet 
(5) Minimum rear yard setback abutting similar uses: 7 feet 
Abutting residential use: 15 feet 
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet 
(7) Maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings: 35%, except that dwellings shall be subject to the provisions of the R-1 District. 
70.2.3. C-3, General Commercial District - removed 
70.2.4. C-4, Interchange Commercial District 
(1) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet 
(2) Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet 
(3) Minimum side yard setback from property line: 10 feet Minimum side yard setback if corner lot: 35 feet 
(4) Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 15 feet 
(5) Maximum building height: 35 feet 
70.2.5. C-5, Neighborhood Convenience Center District 
(1) Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet 
(2) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet 
(3) Minimum side yard setback from property line: 15 feet 
From street rights-of-way: 25 feet 
(4) Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet 
(5) Maximum building height: 35 feet 
70.2.6. C-ED, Commercial Entertainment District 
(1) Minimum district area: 10 acres 
(2) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet 
(3) Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet 
(4) Minimum front yard setback from King Avenue (S.R. 40): 40 feet {from right-of-way}; 
From other public rights-of-way: 25 feet 
(5) Minimum side yard setback from property line of similar uses: 0 feet 
From street rights-of-way: 25 feet 
From property lines abutting existing residential uses: 25 feet 
(6) Minimum rear yard setback abutting similar uses: 0 feet 
Abutting residential use: 25 feet 
(7) Maximum building height: 50 feet, higher with approval of Fire Chief except that no height shall exceed the distance to the adjacent zoning district boundary 
(8) Maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings: 35% 
(9) Minimum district buffer: A full year-round visual buffer shall separate all developed parts of the district from surrounding residential zones. The buffer may be a fence or vegetated berm with a vertical visual buffering of at least 20 feet and be at least 25 feet wide, or a vegetative only buffer of at least 15 feet height and 50 feet wide. 
70.2.7. C-PLMU, Commercial Planned Large Multi-Use District 
(1) Minimum district area: 100 acres 
(2) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet 
(3) Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet 
(4) Minimum front yard setback from King Avenue (S.R. 40) and Laurel Island Parkway: 40 feet {from right-of-way}; 
From other public rights-of-way: 25 feet 
(5) Minimum side yard setback from property line of similar uses: 0 feet 
From street rights-of-way: 25 feet 
From property lines abutting existing residential uses: 25 feet (6) Minimum rear yard setback abutting similar uses: 0 feet 
Abutting residential use: 25 feet 
(6) Reserved. 
(7) Maximum building height: 50 feet, higher with approval of Fire Chief except that no height shall exceed the distance to the adjacent zoning district boundary 
(8) Maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings: 35% 
(9) Minimum district buffer: A full year-round visual buffer shall separate all developed parts of the district from surrounding residential zones. The buffer may be a fence or vegetated berm with a vertical visual buffering of at least 20-feet and be at least 25-feet wide, or a vegetative only buffer of at least 15-feet height and 50-foot wide. 
70.3. Wholesale and Industrial Districts 
70.3.1. I-L, Light Industrial District 
(1) Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's area regulations and intent. 
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback from street: 30 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard setback from property line or street: 30 feet 
(5) Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 20 feet From street: 30 feet 
(6) Maximum building height: 45 feet 
(7) Public and private technical, engineering, and industrial training facilities including on site housing for attendees. 
(8) Minimum district buffer: A full year-round visual buffer shall separate all developed parts of the district from surrounding residential zones. The buffer may be a fence or vegetated berm with a vertical visual buffering of at least 20-feet and be at least 25-feet wide, or a vegetative only buffer of at least 15-feet high and 50-feet wide. 
70.3.2. I-G, General Industrial District 
(1) Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's regulations and intent. 
(2) Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet 
(3) Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard setback from property line: 40 feet From street: 50 feet 
(5) Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 40 feet 
(6) Maximum building height: 85 feet 
70.4. MU, Multi-Use District: 
(1) Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet for up to four (4) units (2 bottom, 2 top), 1,000 square feet for each additional unit 
(2) Minimum Lot Width: Forty (40) feet 
(3) Minimum Front Yard Setback: From King Avenue (State Route 40) - Forty (40) feet All other areas restricted to twenty (20) feet 
(4) Minimum Side Yard: Twenty (20) feet side yard setback from street right-of-way Seven (7) feet for side yard setback from property line of similar usage, 
(5) Minimum Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet setback from street right-of-way or residential zonings district Seven (7) feet from similar commercial uses 
(6) Maximum Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet 
70.5. Minimum Setbacks. Within the zoning districts herein defined, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply: 
MINIMUM SETBACKS 

 
{Definitions of a, b, c above} 
a Eight (8) feet plus two (2) additional feet for each story (floor) above two stores, but not exceeding twenty (20) feet; and when dwelling unit faces side yard, the dwelling [nit] shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from the side 
;le=2q en;None, except when abutting residential district and then not less than twenty (20) feet. 
;le=2q  en;None, except when abutting residential district and then not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2009-3, 4-27-2009; Ord. No. 2014-03, 3-31-2014; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 11-26-2018) 
Sec. 71. - Additional requirements by district. 
71.1. Additional Requirements Governing the Placement of Mobile Homes in the R4 Districts and R-5 Districts: 
(1) Mobile Home Placement. Mobile home supports or pillars shall be provided not more than 10 feet on center or less beginning from the front of the mobile home. Supports or pillars shall be placed upon concrete pads having minimum dimensions of 16″ x 16″ x 4″. 
(2) Anchoring. All mobile homes shall be anchored prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way. The anchoring system shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of ninety (90) miles per hour. 
(3) Stability. All mobile homes shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be stabilized in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home shall permanently rest on wheels used to transport it. 
(4) Skirts. All mobile homes shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed that are designed to compliment the appearance of the mobile home and are coordinated throughout the park. 
(5) Permits. No mover or installer of a mobile home shall place a mobile home on any lot or parcel within the City of Kingsland without securing a permit to install said mobile home. Permit shall certify eligibility of said lot or parcel for such installation. All mobile home installations at a mobile home park or lot shall be subject to inspection for: 
a) Electrical compliance to current edition of N.E.C., Article 550 or 551, as applicable. 
b) Plumbing compliance to GA State Plumbing Code, Chapter XIX and Dwg A31-A33 as applicable. 
c) Structural/Anchorage compliance to GA State Building Code App. "H". 
d) City ordinances as applicable to mobile home parks or R-4 lots. See Section 80 of this Ordinance. 
(6) All installations must have City sticker certificate. 
(7) Mobile home parks are subject to code compliance inspection at any time, but prior notice of one (1) week will be given by building department. 
(8) Mobile home parks must be brought into compliance with state and city codes before installation permit is issued. Upon notice of deficiency, the mobile home park owner has one (1) month to initiate improvements or no new permits will be issued and code enforcement proceedings will commence. 
(9) Transporting service company or mobile home park owner is responsible for above permits and fees. License numbers of contractors must be included on permits. The mobile home must bear a state certification sticker and current county tax location sticker. 
(10) Replacement of Dilapidated Mobile Homes. A mobile home located within a conforming use may be replaced with a later model, a more substantial or better quality mobile home, provided it does not increase the density already established. 
(11) Violations. Permit violation penalties and/or code violation penalties after grace period expires, where applicable will be as per the following schedule, the mobile home park owner (or in the case of single lot mobile home owner), that owner being responsible for payment: 
(a) Mobile home park non-conformance to codes listed in this section: 
$10.00 violation as found by inspection conducted as per section above. (Includes the sewer and water service, skirting and electrical service requirements.) 
(b) Mobile homes installed without compliance to this policy: 
$100.00 violation (Example: Without permits, or State Certification Sticker) 
(c) Failed plumbing/electrical/structural inspection: 
$10.00 reinspection. This item can be assessed on a per installation basis whereas numbers 1 and 2 above applies to entire mobile park. 
(d) Failure to pay any of the above fees: 
Within the one (1) month grace period after violation notice: 1.5 times the penalty listed in numbers 1 through 4 is inclusive of any permits required. 
Within three (3) months of notice: 
Legal steps, due process initiated to enforce compliance. 
71.2. Additional requirements governing MH, mobile home park district. 
71.2.1 Grading and Drainage: Each mobile home park shall be graded and drained in accordance with the Camden County Master Drainage Study Engineering Handbook and other requirements as determined by the City Council or their designated representative. 
71.2.2. Common Open Space. At least ten (10) percent of the gross site area shall be set aside as common open space and recreational facilities (as described by section 71.1 Additional Requirements). Common open spaces shall be provided according to the following standards: 
(i) Common open space shall not include streets, parking lots, public rights-of-way or sites for water and sewage treatment plants. 
(ii) Pedestrian and bicycle paths forming part of the common open space shall be paved and at least five (5) feet in width. 
(iii) Common open spaces shall be linked together or otherwise made available to all park residents. 
71.2.3 Underground Utilities. All utilities, including but notlimited to electric power, telephones and Cable T.V., shall be located underground. 
71.2.4 Traffic Circulation. All mobile home parks shall be provided with an on-site paved street system providing safe, convenient, and direct vehicular access to each mobile home space. All paving must meet City specifications as provided in the Kingsland subdivision regulations. Paved drives shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, and parking space of gravel, limerock, shell or similar all-weather surface sufficient to accommodate at least two (2) automobiles shall be located on each mobile home space. 
71.2.5 Landscaping. A minimum of three (3) trees shall be retained or planted at each mobile home stand. 
71.2.6 Buffer. There shall be a landscaped buffer around all mobile home parks of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width. Said buffer shall also meet the requirements of Article XIV, Section 140. 
71.3 Recreation Vehicles - Towed or Self Powered. 
A. Temporary permits are required subject to same permit process and penalty as set forth in Section 71.4 above. 
1. Permitted temporary mobile homes are not required to be set on pier footings or anchored as long as installation does not exceed six (6) months unless required by mobile park owner or lot owner. 
2. Permit for temporary mobile home installation is to be renewed each six (6) months and subject to reinspection and required fees as set forth in Sections 71.1 and 71.2 above. 
3. For longer than six (6) months, the permitted installation shall be considered permanent and thus required to comply with all stipulations of Sections 71.1 and 71.2. 
71.4 Grandfathered in Installations: 
1. Permit fees for existing recreation vehicle installations shall be waived, but upon inspection of installation, a permit shall be issued and certificate sticker attached. 
2. Said installation shall be designated as temporary or permanent at time of permit issue and then subject to compliance to above policy set forth in Section 71.3. 
3. Subsequent to permit issue, the fees listed shall henceforth apply to any future violations of permit as per above policy. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Cross reference— Also see Article VIII, Special Provisions 
Sec. 72. - P D, planned development district. 
72.1 District Intent. The purpose of this district is to achieve site design and land development of superior quality through the encroachment of flexibility and creativity in achieving the purposes of other districts in this Zoning Ordinance by departing from the strict application of use and dimensional requirements under certain conditions and imposing other requirements in lieu thereof. 
The objective of the Planned Development District is to encourage ingenuity, imagination, and flexibility of design efforts on the part of builders, architects, site planners, developers to produce developments which are in keeping with density and open space objectives of the Zoning Ordinance, while departing from the strict application of use, setback, height, and minimum lot size requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Land for P D Districts must be provided through the rezoning process (Article XXI, Amendments.) 
72.2 Specific Requirements. In order to qualify for a Planned Development zoning classification, a proposed planned development must first meet the following specific requirements: 
(1) The site utilized for Planned Developments must contain an area of not less than four (4) acres. 
(2) The site must have a minimum width between any two opposite boundary lines of 300 feet and must adjoin or have direct access to at least one improved public street. 
(3) The application for amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the Planned Development. 
(4) A suitable plot plan shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
(5) A written report shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
72.3 Application for Amendment. 
(1) Any request pertaining to establishing a P.D. District shall be considered an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article XXI, Amendments. 
(2) All information required in Article VII shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and subsequently forwarded to City Council with the recommendations of the Planning Commission. 
(3) If approved by the City Council, all information pertaining to the proposal shall be adopted as an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, to be the standards of development for that particular Planned Development District. 
(4) Before approval of a Planned Development District, the City Council may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the City Attorney guaranteeing completion of the development according to the criteria listed herein. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount set by the City Council. 
72.4 Sketch Plan for Planned Development. Prior to the filing of a plot plan for planned development, a sketch plan may be submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch. When submitted, the sketch plan shall include the following information: 
(1) General information items: 
a) Name of the proposed development and developers. 
b) A north arrow. 
c) The boundary lines of the proposed development. 
d) The location, name and right-of-way width of any existing streets within or adjacent to the proposed development. 
(2) Proposed building sites and sizes, and the proposed layout of roads, parking areas, and other features in relation to existing conditions. 
(3) Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
(4) Proposed means of water and sewage proposal. 
72.5 Plot Plan for Planned Development. The plot plan drawn to scale (1" equals 100' or 1" equals 50') by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered architect, shall show the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration. The plan shall include the following elements: 
(1) General Information items: 
a) Name of the development and developers. 
b) A north arrow. 
c) Date of field survey. 
d) Tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearings and angles. 
e) Reference points to at least two permanent monuments. 
(2) Proposed building sites and sizes. 
(3) Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
(4) All property dimensions. 
(5) Platting and street systems: 
a) Proposed reservations or dedications for street. 
b) Means of ingress and egress. 
c) Access and circulation arrangements 
d) Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(6) Means of protecting or screening abutting properties including proposed landscaping. 
(7) Location of proposed reservations, easements, or dedications. 
(8) If requested, two foot vertical contour intervals. 
72.6 Written Report for Planned Development. A written report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development, and shall include, where applicable: 
(1) A general description of the proposal. 
(2) A legal description of the site. 
(3) Proposed standards for development, including: 
a) Restrictions on the use of property. 
b) Density, yard, and height requirement. 
c) Restrictive covenants. 
(4) Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
(5) Exceptions or variations from the requirements of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance if any are being requested. 
(6) Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities. 
(7) Descriptions of percentage of land within the development to be provided for various uses: 
a) Residential 
b) Commercial 
c) Industrial 
d) Open space 
e) Utilities 
f) Parking and storage 
g) Others 
72.7 Permitted Uses. Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as being compatible with surrounding districts and the intent of the proposed P.D. District may be permitted. Thereafter, the uses permitted in the district shall be restricted to those proposed, approved, and adopted according to procedures set forth herein. 
72.8 General Design Criteria and Development Standards. 
(1) Overall site design should be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, sizes and street patters, and use relationships. 
(2) Variety in building types, heights, placement on lots and size of open spaces are encouraged if they are conducive to a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing living environment. 
(3) The average density for residential dwelling units in a P. D. District should not exceed those set forth in the R-2 District for residential units and C-2 District for commercial uses, although it may be clustered within the P. D. District. 
(4) A buffer strip with plant cover, trees and/or an attractive fence should be provided by the P. D. District, unless the adjoining use is compatible. For instance, when one family and multi-family dwellings within a P D District are on property adjoining an R-3 District, then no buffer shall be required. 
(5) Within a P D District, the design should include buffers suitable for screening residential areas from commercial or industrial uses when dangers of incompatibility exist. 
(6) The sign and parking regulations of this Ordinance should be accepted as minimum standards, and therefore creative improvements are encouraged. 
72.9. Planned Development. Permitted uses for Planned Development District are established in Section 60 of this Ordinance. Use, area, bulk, and height requirements shall be determined by the procedures set forth in this section. 
72.9.1. General Conditions. Any area may be rezoned as Planned Development District if the following conditions are met: 
72.9.1.1. More than one principal land use or separate land uses, which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district are proposed for development on a parcel under single or multiple ownership or management. 
72.9.1.2. The area is located within the existing Residential District, a Highway Commercial District or a General Commercial District. 
72.9.1.3. Exceptions or variations to the site, dimensional changes in standards required, or changes in other requirements of this Ordinance are being sought. 
72.9.2. Specific Requirements. In order to qualify for a Planned Development District zoning classification, a proposed development must first meet each of the following specific requirements: 
72.9.2.1. The site utilized for the proposed development must contain an area of not less than ten (10) acres. 
72.9.2.2. The site must have a minimum width between any two boundary lines of four hundred fifty (450) feet and must adjoin or have direct access to at least one arterial street or collector street. 
72.9.2.3. The area proposed shall be in one ownership or management, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to this Ordinance shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the plan. 
72.9.3. Procedure for Approval of a Planned Development District. The filing of a plan for a planned development shall constitute a request for an amendment to this Ordinance and shall meet the requirements specified in this Ordinance. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
72.9.3.1. Two copies of a preliminary site plan shall be submitted to the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
72.9.3.2. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall review the proposals prior to submitting a recommendation to the Council. The Director of Community Planning and Development may make reasonable additional requirements including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, landscaping, and maintenance thereof, lighting, signs and advertising devices, screening, access ways, curb cuts, traffic control, height of buildings and setback of buildings, to protect adjoining residential lots or uses, or to protect the Planned Development District from adjacent uses. 
72.9.3.3. Approval by the Council subsequent to a public hearing constitutes creation of the Planned Development District. 
72.10. Preliminary Site Plan Required. The preliminary site plan which accompanies an application for approval of Planned Development District shall show the following: 
72.10.1. The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, designer, or landscape architect, and the development. 
72.10.2. The north point, scale, and date; the scale of the site plan shall be as follows: 
(a) For projects containing fifty (50) acres or more, not more than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
(b) For projects containing less than fifty (50) acres, not more than fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch. 
72.10.3. Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries and proposed changes in zoning. 
72.10.4. The boundaries of the property involved, the location of all existing easements, section lines, and property lines, existing streets, buildings, and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
72.10.5. The location and size of existing and proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, loading areas (including number of parking and loading spaces), and outdoor lighting systems. 
72.10.6. The location of proposed lots, setback lines, and easements, and proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, and open spaces. 
72.10.7. The location and height of all proposed main and accessory buildings and structures. 
72.10.8. Location, height, and material of all fences, walls, screens, plants, and landscaping. 
72.10.9. Proposed location, intended use, and character of all buildings. 
72.10.10. Location, character, size, and height and orientation of proposed signs. 
72.10.11. A location map showing the position of the proposed development in relationship to the surrounding area. 
72.10.12. A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project, gross and net, and the percentage thereof proposed to be devoted to different dwelling types, commercial uses, other nonresidential uses, off-street parking, streets, parks, schools, and other public and private reservations. 
72.10.13. A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units of various types in the project and the overall project density in dwelling units per acre, gross and net, as required by district regulations. 
72.10.14. A general description of the proposal, stating the purpose and goals of the development, and the design features incorporated for meeting these goals. 
72.10.15. A detailed legal description of the location of the site. 
72.10.16. A discussion of the proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards and yard requirements restricting covenants. The Director of Community Planning and Development may establish additional requirements for the preliminary site plan and in special cases, may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion of that requirement is not essential to a proper decision on the project. 
72.11. Final Plat Required. A final plat shall be recorded prior to submission of an application for a Building Permit. The plat shall comply with all laws, regulations, and resolutions governing the approval of subdivisions and, in addition, shall show all the features required on the preliminary site plan. A plat of development shall be recorded regardless of whether a subdivision is proposed. At least one of the final site plan maps shall include topographical contour lines at intervals no less than five (5) feet. 
72.12. Review Standards. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall review plans for proposed planned developments for conformity with the Comprehensive Plan. Specifically, the proposed plan shall meet the following conditions: 
72.12.1. The plan shall provide for appropriate relationships between uses around the boundaries and uses within the Planned Development District and shall indicate in written form those measures which would be taken to insure that adjacent property will not be adversely affected, and the Planned Development District will be similarly protected. 
72.12.2. The plan shall conform to the purpose of this resolution as stated in Article I. 
72.12.3. Access to all developed property shall be sufficient to provide for an acceptable level of fire protection. 
72.13. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
72.13.1. Amendments and Additions. Amendments or additions to an approved plan or to the boundaries of Planned Development District shall be accomplished subject to the same regulations and procedures applicable to a new application. 
72.13.2. Deed Restrictions. The Director of Community Planning and Development may require filing of deed restrictions to help carry out the intent of this resolution subject to the same penalties as established in Article XXI. 
72.14. Site Design Requirements. 
72.14.1. Location of District. A Planned Development District may be established in any of the following existing districts: Residential District, Highway Commercial District and General Commercial District. 
72.14.2. Site Design, General. The proposed development must be designated so as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhoods. The review by the Director of Community Planning and Development shall consider the following design elements: 
72.14.2.1. Privacy. Personal and individual privacy shall be maintained and balanced with the provision of public and common areas. 
72.14.2.2. Variety. Interest and variety shall be sought, by means of street design and changes in mixtures of building types, heights, facades, setbacks, plants, or size of open space, and the design should be harmonious as a whole and not simply from street-to-street. 
72.14.2.3. Traffic and Parking. No through or commercial traffic should be permitted; streets should not be straight for long distances, but should curve so as to discourage fast movement of traffic; group parking areas should be screened as defined in Section 140, so that the vehicles are substantially hidden from the street. 
72.14.2.4. Lot Area and Lot Width, General. Minimum lot area and lot width requirements may be increased by the County Health Department when the said Department determines that an increased area or width is necessary for health reasons. 
72.15 Site Design, Detail. 
72.15.1. Open Space. A minimum of at least twenty (20) percent of the gross area of the site should be retained in open space. 
72.15.2. Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be developed under the regulations governing such dwellings in the district in which the Planned Development District is to be located except that the minimum lot area of such dwelling lots may be reduced by twenty (20) percent and the rear yard setback may be reduced by the minimum dimensions as the required side yard setback. Lot widths may be reduced below fifty (50) feet. If residential uses are not permitted in the district, the R-3 zoning district restrictions shall prevail, except the rear yard setback may be reduced to eight (8) feet. 
72.15.3. Townhouses. Townhouses shall be developed under the regulations governing such dwellings in the R-3 zoning district. 
72.15.4. Multi-Family Dwellings. Multi-family dwelling units shall be developed under the regulations governing such dwellings in the R-3 zoning district. 
72.15.5. Commercial and Service Establishments. Commercial and service establishments shall be developed under the regulations governing such establishments in the C-3 zoning district. 
72.15.6. Building Coverage. The total ground area occupied by buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total ground area of the planned unit development. Building coverage is defined as the land area covered by dwelling balconies, porches, and other architectural projections, but not including roof overhangs, open balconies, and uncovered porches. 
72.15.7. Building Heights. Height of particular buildings shall not be basis for denial or approval of a plan, provided any structures in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be designed and platted to be consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of existing public services and facilities. 
72.15.8. Density of Housing Types. A maximum of thirty (30) percent of the dwelling units located in a Planned Development District may be two-family dwellings, townhouses, and multi-family dwelling units. 
72.15.9. Density of Retail and Service Uses. No more than five (5) percent of the floor space in the Planned Development District shall be used for retail or service establishments. 
72.15.10. Street Standards. All streets located in the Planned Development District shall be Standard Streets. 
72.15.11. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as required in Sections 54 and 55. 
72.15.12. Shopping center and other types of planned developments shall not have more than two access points to any one public street, unless unusual circumstances dictate the need for additional access points. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 80. - Mobile homes and travel trailers. 
80.1. Travel Trailer Parks. In any district where travel trailer parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit a lay-out of the park subject to the following conditions: 
80.1.1. No travel trailer park shall be located except with direct access to a County, State or Federal Highway, with a minimum lot width of not less than fifty (50) feet for portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
80.1.2. The minimum lot area per park shall be five (5) acres. 
80.1.3. Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used by travel trailers provided they meet any additional laws and ordinances of the Council. 
80.1.4. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to the operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
(1) Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operations shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park. 
(2) Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
(3) Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
80.1.5 No space shall be so located that any park intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, or collector street, or within twenty-five (25) feet of the right-of-way of any minor street. 
80.1.6. In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the Camden County Health Department. 
80.2. Mobile Home Parks. In any district where mobile home parks are permitted, the applicant shall submit a lay-out of the park subject to the following conditions: 
80.2.1. The following minimum standards shall apply to each mobile home space or stand: 
(1) Minimum size: (square feet) ..... 7,500 
(2) Minimum width of space: ..... 50 feet 
(3) Minimum depth of space: ..... 100 feet 
(4) Minimum side yard required: ..... 10 feet 
(5) Minimum front yard: ..... 25 feet 
(6) Minimum rear yard: ..... 15 feet 
(7) Minimum lot area per park: ..... 5 acres 
(8) Minimum lot width for portion used for entrance and exit shall be fifty (50) feet 
(9) No mobile home shall be located closer than thirty-five (35) to the centerline of any roadway within the park. 
80.2.2. The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be ten (10) spaces. 
80.2.3. No mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and ordinances of the Council. 
80.2.4. Convenience establishments of a commercial nature, including stores, laundry and dry cleaning agencies, and beauty shops and barber shops, may be permitted in mobile home parks provided that such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operations: 
(1) Shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park; 
(2) Shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park; 
(3) Shall be located, designed and intended to serve frequent trade or service needs of persons residing in the park; 
(4) Shall present no visible evidence to their commercial character from any portion of any residential district outside that park. 
80.2.5. In addition to meeting the above requirements the mobile home park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the Camden County Health Department. 
80.3. Mobile Home Subdivisions. In any district where mobile home subdivisions are permitted, the applicant shall submit a lay-out of the park subject to the following conditions: 
80.3.1. The minimum size of plat developed into a mobile home subdivision shall be five (5) acres. 
80.3.2. Minimum lot area and lot width and minimum lot coverage shall conform to requirements set forth in Section 70.3.4. 
80.4. Temporary Usage. A single mobile home unit, or travel trailer may be used for an office in a subdivision by the developer, or for other special purposes, for a period not to exceed six (6) months upon written approval from the Director of Community Planning and Development; if over six (6) months approval of Council. 
80.5. Non-Conformance. Any travel trailer or mobile home which does not meet the requirements in the above paragraphs shall be removed at the owners expense after receipt of notice of its non-conformance from the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
{Also see Section 70.1.2 Additional Requirements Governing MH, Mobile Home Park District} 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 81. - Townhouses. 
Within the districts permitting townhouses, the following requirements shall apply: 
81.1. No more than ten (10) nor fewer than three (3) continuous townhouses shall be built in a row with approximately the same front lot. 
81.2. No side yard is required except that on corner and interior lots. The end of the building in any townhouse grouping shall conform to the side yard requirements of that district. 
81.3. Not more than forty (40) percent of the lot area shall be occupied by building. 
81.4. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet by most direct pedestrian route, from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
81.5. All townhouse complexes shall be required to tie into the public sanitary sewer system. No other means of waste disposal shall be permitted. 
81.6. All other requirements within the district in which the townhouses are located shall prevail. 
Sec. 82. - Accessory and temporary buildings. 
82.1. Accessory Buildings. The location of accessory buildings and uses in residential districts must meet the following requirements: 
82.1.1. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building or such accessory building shall be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof, and therefore such requirements applicable to the main building. 
82.1.2. A detached accessory building shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, nor closer than five (5) feet to any lot line, provided that accessory buildings on corner lots adjacent to public rights-of-way shall meet the setback requirements for corner lots in Section 71. 
82.1.3. A detached accessory building, not more than two (2) stories in height, may be constructed on not more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard. 
82.1.4. No detached accessory building may be located on the front yard of a lot. 
82.2. Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only, may be permitted in any district and shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, 3-10-2008) 
Sec. 83. - Fall-out shelters. 
Fall out shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
83.1. If any portion of the structures extend above the ground, that portion above must comply with the yard and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
83.2. If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with the yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
83.3. A fall-out shelter, underground or above ground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and shall not be located in the front yard between the main building and the street on which it fronts. 
83.4. Fall-out shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
Sec. 84. - Car ports. 
Car ports are permissible as are permissible in all residential zoning districts, subject to the following conditions: 
84.1. All portions of a car port must comply with the yard setback and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and approved by the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
84.2. All portions of a car port must comply with the currently adopted State of Georgia Building Codes, including but not limited to applications for permits and wind speed requirements by location. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 5-9-2005) 
Sec. 85. - Automobile service stations. 
Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
85.1. Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within 100 feet of any residential district, or any property containing a school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, institution for children or dependents. 
85.2. Site Requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 120 feet and a minimum area of 12,000 square feet. All buildings shall be set back 40 feet from all street right-of-way lines and all canopies shall be setback fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
85.3. Access to Site. Vehicular entrances or exits at the automobile service station: 
85.3.1 Shall not be provided with more than two curb cuts for the first 120 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof. 
85.3.2. Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more than forty (40) feet as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection or closer than ten (10) feet to the adjoining property. 
85.3.3. Shall not have any two driveways, or curb cuts, any closer than twenty (20) feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
85.4. Gasoline Pump Islands. All gasoline pump islands shall be setback at least fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening line has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line; and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pump island shall be located not less than thirty (30) feet back of the right-of-way line; however, the pumps shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the center line of an arterial street, fifty-five (55) feet from the center line on a collector street, and forty-five (45) feet from the center line of other streets. 
85.5. Off-Street Parking. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces required with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
85.6. Other Site Improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
85.6.1. A raised curb of at least six (6) inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings. 
85.6.2. A solid fence or wall six (6) feet in height shall be erected along all adjacent property lines facing any adjacent residential lot. 
85.6.3. Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties. 
85.6.4. Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be placed within the public right-of-way and shall not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
85.6.5. All driveways, parking, storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
85.7. Storage of Inflammable Products. Outside above ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquified petroleum gas, oil or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any automobile service station in all zoning districts. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 90. - Non-conforming building and uses. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to recognize that the elimination of existing buildings and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this Ordinance. It is also the intent of this Ordinance to administer the elimination of non-conforming uses, buildings, and structures as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
Therefore, any structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, and amendment of this Ordinance, and amendments thereto, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions, may be continued subject to the following provisions and exceptions: 
90.1. Unsafe Structures. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by an authority may be restored to a safe condition, provided the requirements in this section are met. 
90.2 Alterations. Any change in a non-conforming building, use, or building site or yard area is subject to the following: 
90.2.1. No non-conforming building can be structurally altered, except repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures required by law; the changing of interior partitions; and interior remodeling, except as permitted in Sections 90.4 and 90.2.2. 
90.2.2. A non-conforming building may be structurally altered providing said alteration does not significantly change the use thereof, substantially improves the entire appearance and esthetic value of the structure and the Director of Community Planning and Development deems said alteration to be in the best interest of the City of Kingsland. 
90.2.3. No non-conforming building, mobile home or lands, except those residential dwellings needing repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures as required by law, can be substantially added to, moved or extended in any manner unless such building or land is changed so as to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
90.2.4. Whenever an existing residential dwelling must require repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures which will force the location of the future addition of the dwelling nearer the lot line than the requirements set forth in this Ordinance, the addition to the dwelling shall be allowed to extend to the existing building line but no nearer the property line than any existing portion of the dwelling. 
90.3. Extension. A non-conforming use of land shall be restricted to the lot occupied by such use as of the effective date of this Ordinance. A non-conforming use of a building shall not be extended to include either additional building or land after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
90.4. Restoration of Damaged Buildings. A non-conforming building, structure, or improvement which is hereafter damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding fifty (50) percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure, building or improvement may not be reconstructed or restored to the same non-conforming use except upon approval of the Planning Commission. 
90.5. Change in Use. A non-conforming use which is changed to a conforming use shall not be permitted to revert to the original or a less restrictive use. 
90.6. Discontinuance. A non-conforming use which became such after the adoption of this Ordinance and which has been discontinued shall not be re-established and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 91. - Lot inspection report. 
A Lot Inspection Report, prepared by a registered land surveyor, must be attached to the application for a Building Permit, if such application applies to new construction. Regarding additions to existing structures, the Community Planning and Development Director may request a Lot Inspection Report if he/she is of the opinion that the report is warranted. The Lot Inspection Report is to be in the form attached hereto. The "layout sketch" provided on the Lot Inspection Report shall show placement of the structure on the property, building setback distances of the structure from the property lines, and street name(s). The lot inspection format sheet can be seen on the following page. 
All new construction finish floor elevation shall be no lower than 1.0 feet above the closest City maintained or future City maintained street elevation at the discretion of the City Engineer. This elevation shall be taken within 100 lineal feet in either direction of said construction site. The intent of this is to create and open drainage storm water swales in order to comply with the Camden County Master Drainage Study, dated February, 1983. The finished floor elevation shall be indicated on a foundation plan and the Lot Inspection Report, and shall be sealed by a State of Georgia licensed surveyor or engineer. No further construction can continue until said plan(s) have been submitted and approved by the Community Planning and Development Director, Building Inspector, or City Engineer. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 100. - Height limits. 
Chimneys, water, fire, radio, and television towers, church spires, domes, cupolas, stage towers and scenery lofts, cooling towers, roof signs, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, flag poles, parapet walls, sills, granaries, windmills, and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected above the height limits herein established. 
Sec. 101. - Yard requirements. 
Yard requirements shall be modified subject to the following conditions: 
101.1. On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
101.2. Whenever a rear property line of a lot abuts upon an alley one-half (½) of the alley width shall be considered as a portion of the required rear yard. 
101.3. An unroofed porch shall project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet. 
101.4. The front and side yard requirements may be waived where dwellings occupy space above commercial uses upon approval of the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 102. - Access to public streets. 
Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance to the following requirements: 
102.1. Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
102.2. Any additional dwelling shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway open to the sky at least fifteen (15) feet in width. 
Sec. 103. - Lots of record. 
Where the owner of a lot of record or his successor to the title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, the following exceptions may be allowed: 
103.1. Land Use. Where a lot, tract or parcel of land is an area or width that does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, the lot may be used for a single-family dwelling in the Residential Districts (R-1, R-2, R-3). A two family dwelling may be constructed in an R-2 or R-3 Residential District provided the lot to be used has a minimum area of 5,000 square feet and a minimum lot width at the building line of fifty (50) feet and provided that it is connected to a public sewer. 
103.2. Replatting. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the use district in which they are located, such lots shall be platted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the use district. 
103.3. Improvements. Buildings or structures located on sub-standard lots of record may be improved only when the addition of adequate plumbing is required by the laws and ordinances of the Council, provided that the yard requirements in Section 90 are adhered to. 
103.4. Side Yard Requirements. The side yard requirements for substandard lots of record may be improved only when the addition of adequate plumbing is required by the laws and ordinances of the Council, provided that the yard requirements in Section 70 are adhered to. 
103.5. Expansion of Existing Dwelling on Sub-Standard Lots of Record. Where a residential lot is an area or width that does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, and said lot has an existing dwelling, said dwelling may be improved or expanded provided the following requirements are met: 
(1) Proposed improvements or expansions comply with current setback requirements. 
(2) Total lot coverage, including proposed improvements or expansions, do not exceed current allowable maximum coverage. 
Sec. 104. - Front and side yard setbacks for dwellings. 
The setback requirements of this Ordinance for side yards on corner lots and/or front yards shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots located, wholly or in part, 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same streets as such lot, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the existing developed lots. 
Sec. 105. - Zero side yard setback. 
Upon review and approval by the Director of Community Planning and Development, the side yard setback requirement for single-family dwelling lots may be reduced to allow a zero side yard setback on one side of a lot providing the following conditions are met: 
105.1. Any reduction in one yard requirement shall result in a corresponding increase in the side yard requirement for the opposite side yard. In this manner the overall side yard requirement of the district shall be met. 
105.2. Front yard, rear yard and corner side yard requirements of the district shall not be modified. 
105.3. Side yard setback requirements shall not be modified for an individual lot unless it is part of a block in which each lot's side yard setback is to be modified. The arrangement of modified side yard requirements shall allow for an open yard area between each dwelling unit. 
105.4. The developer of a subdivision for which modifications to the side yard setback requirements are requested shall furnish to the Director of Community Planning and Development a copy of proposed deed restrictions, conditions, or covenants. Such covenants shall include at a minimum, provisions for: 
(1) A maintenance easement which will allow for the maintenance of exterior dwelling walls facing a zero setback line. 
(2) A requirement that dwelling walls facing a zero setback be windowless. 
Sec. 106. - Additional dwellings on a single lot. 
The Director of Community Planning and Development, after a review of an application and public hearing thereon, may grant a special exception to permit one additional single-family dwelling on the same lot or parcel of land as that of the main dwelling provided that: 
106.1. Each additional dwelling conforms to the minimum lot area, minimum width and maximum lot coverage requirements for such dwellings as set forth in Section 70, and conforms to the setback requirements as set forth in Section 70. 
106.2. The arrangement of such additional dwellings are in such a manner that if the lot or parcel of land is ever subdivided, no nonconforming lots or nonconforming buildings are created; and 
106.3. Each additional dwelling has access to a public street by means of an unobstructed passageway of at least fifteen (15) feet in width. 
Sec. 107. - Animals in a residential district. 
Animals may be kept in the residential districts subject to the district regulations and the following conditions: 
107.1. The minimum lot area upon which a horse or pony may be kept in a R-1, R-2 and R-6 district is three (3) acres for the first horse or pony and one-half (½) acre for each additional horse or pony. 
107.2. The minimum lot area upon which fowl may be kept is one-half (½) acre. The maximum number of fowl that may be kept for one-half (½) acre is two (2). For each additional one-half (½) acre an additional two (2) fowl may be kept. Fowl may not be allowed to range freely. 
107.3. A maximum number of eight (8) dogs or cats in any combination may be kept in a residential district if the lot is larger than one-half (½) acre. Otherwise only four (4) dogs or cats in any combination may be kept. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Amend. of 7-26-2010) 
Sec. 108. - Street addresses—Numbering. 
All houses or places of dwelling, business, profession, establishment, or other location, situated on City streets, alleys or other ways of access in the City of Kingsland shall be numbered in accordance with a system of numbering heretofore established by the governing authority of said City. 
108.1. That the number assigned by the City to each and every place of residence or business as above referred to shall be promptly displayed by the attachment of the number assigned by the City to that particular place in plain lettering of sufficient size and placement as to be seen and identified from a vehicle moving along the City streets. Such size shall be no less than three (3) inches high. 
108.2. That prior to displaying a number or numbers, each resident shall apply to the Clerk of the City of Kingsland to obtain the correct number for the dwelling or place in question which said number shall be assigned by the City Clerk or some other person designated by the City for that purpose. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 110. - Home occupations. 
110.1 Intent and Purpose. The City of Kingsland recognizes the need for some citizens to use their place of residence for limited nonresidential activities. However, the city believes that the need to protect the integrity of its residential areas is of paramount concern. A "home occupation" permit is the method used to allow and to regulate nonresidential activity within the City's residential districts. 
Traditionally, in zoning, certain occupational uses termed "home occupations" have been allowed in dwelling units. Such uses have been allowed largely on the basis that such uses are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence, and that the nature of home occupational uses is such that they are compatible with or even "belong" in the home. It is recognized by this city that certain limited home occupational uses can be useful to both the general community as well as the resident-proprietor. Also recognized is the difficulty of writing an ordinance dealing with home occupations in a "middle-of-the-road" fashion, which is neither discriminatory nor arbitrary, which is the intent of Article XI. 
Home occupations, regardless of classification, shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust, odors, radio-activity or heat detectable beyond the property lines or beyond the walls of the dwelling unit, if the unit is part of a multifamily structure. Home occupations shall not be a fire hazard, nor shall the home occupation cause or create excessive traffic. 
With the above in mind, it is the intent and purpose of this Section to provide for certain types of home occupations within residential districts and which: 
(1)  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
(2)  Are compatible with residential uses; 
(3)  Are limited in extent; and 
(4)  Do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
110.2 Classification. It is further the intent of the City of Kingsland to classify "Home Occupations" as follows: 
(1)  Home Office; 
(2)  Home Occupation; and 
(3)  Residential Business. 
110.3. Classifications with Definitions. 
1. HOME OFFICE: A "Home Office" means an office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There will be no changes which would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office will be restricted to no more than one room of the dwelling and cannot exceed more than three hundred (300) square feet in area. Such office uses shall be limited to routine office clerical or bookkeeping procedures which can be conducted within a residence. Home offices shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises or the storage of inventory, raw materials or other materials to be used in the business. Home offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public including but not limited to customers, clients or vendors. No outside storage or display including signs is permitted and no one other than family members who reside in the premises may be employed in the office. "Home Offices" also include, but are not limited to, any business in which the occupant of the home requires the use of his/her telephone for setting up appointments for "outside of the home" businesses, such as house cleaning services, pet sitting services, telephone solicitations, or any other business in which the occupant of the home may engage in outside of the home and which does not require equipment to be stored at the residence (ladders, paint, wood, etc.). Approval may be made by the Director of Community Planning and Development, upon review and approval by the City Manager; denial will be based on Planning Commission recommendation and City Council approval. 
2. HOME OCCUPATION: A "Home Occupation" means an occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There is no access by the public. A home occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a home office but more restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and type of business. Certain conditions are placed on "home occupations" which are set out in Section 110.4 hereof. Planning Commission recommendation and City Council approval are required. 
3. RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS: A "Residential Business" means an occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The business may require access by the public. The residential business is designed to be less restrictive than a home office or home occupation in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business. Certain conditions are placed on "Residential Businesses" which are set out in Section 110.5 hereof. Planning Commission recommendation and City Council approval are required. 
110.4. Special Conditions. 
1. "Home Office" - See Section 110.4.(2) 
2. "Home Occupations" shall meet the following conditions: 
a) If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a letter from the property owner must be attached to the application giving permission for the applicant to conduct a home occupation in the premises. 
b) Home occupations shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles, manufacturing or any other use which will create noise, noxious odors or any hazard that may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
c) Home occupations shall not allow customers or the public to come to the premises. 
d) The occupation or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. 
e) The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner at the time of the application and the home occupation shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business and has a current business license. 
f) Home occupations shall be limited to no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total heated floor area of the residence, or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less. The size of the home occupation shall be specified at the time of the application. 
g) The portion of the residence in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property. 
h) No other employees other than family members residing on the premises shall be permitted. 
i) There shall be no exterior evidence of a business being conducted on the premises. No outside storage or display shall be allowed. 
j) No more than one home occupation or residential business is allowed in a residence at one time. 
k) One business vehicle used exclusively by the resident is permitted. The vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck or van and is limited in size to a one-ton carrying capacity. The vehicle may have reasonable business identification (signs) on it when it is parked at the premises and will not have any equipment used in the business left on the vehicle in a manner that can be seen from the surrounding property. 
l) Any pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles having no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day. Such pickups and/or deliveries, if any, are to be during daylight hours. 
110.5 "Residential Businesses" shall meet the following requirements: 
1) If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a letter from the property owner must be attached to the application giving permission for the applicant to conduct a resident business in the premises. 
2) Residential businesses shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles or boats, nor shall it include manufacturing or any other use which will create noise, noxious odors or any hazard that may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. 
3) The residential business shall not involve group instruction or group assembly of people on the premises, with the exception of "daycare centers" and "home parties" for products such as Tupperware, AmWay, Mary Kay Cosmetics, etc. Such "home parties" are to be limited to no more than one (1) "home party" per week. 
4) The occupation or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling. 
5) The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner at the time of the application and, if approved, the residential business shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business and has a current business license. 
6) Residential businesses shall be limited to no more than thirty-five percent of the total heated floor area of the residence. The proposed size of the residential business shall be specified at the time of application. 
7) Any additions or alterations to the residence which will be used for the residential business must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential development. 
8) The portion of the residence in which the business is conducted shall be completely enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property. 
9) Only one employee in excess of family members residing on the premises shall be permitted. For uses where no customers or clients are coming to the site, the number of employees permitted at any one time may be increased to two. 
10) Property on which the residential business is proposed must have frontage on a public road. 
11) Parking for customers/clients must be provided on site so as not to interfere with the neighboring property in any way, the location of parking to be recommended/approved by the Planning Commission and City Council. 
12) No outside storage or display shall be allowed. 
13) Days and operation requiring access by the public, customers and/or clients shall be Monday through Saturday, daylight hours only, with the exception of "home parties" referred to in Section C, sub-paragraph 3, hereof. 
14) No more than one home occupation or residential business is allowed in a residence at one time. 
15) The principal practitioner will be permitted to park one commercial vehicle in the approved parking area. The commercial vehicle is limited to a passenger car, a van or a light truck (up to one ton). 
16) Any utility trailer needed for the orderly operation of the business must be specifically requested and recommended/approved by the Planning Commission and City Council. The request must include the proposed use and size of the trailer. 
17) Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles having no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day. The pickups and deliveries are restricted to daylight hours only. 
18) No article or service shall be sold or offered for sale except as may be manufactured or assembled by members of the immediate family residing on the premises, or their employees. Manufactured items are limited to items manufactured within the home (crafts, clothing, etc.) or to the dwelling's garage (such as items made from wood). 
19) The Planning Commission and/or City Council may place any reasonable conditions on the application deemed necessary to insure the orderly operation of the proposed business and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
110.6. Permit Fees. 
1) "Home Offices" - requires a permit fee of $50.00. 
2) "Home Occupations" - requires a permit fee of $50.00. 
3) "Residential Businesses" - requires a permit fee of $50.00. 
110.7. Notification to Neighboring Properties. 
1) "Home Occupation" and "Residential Business" must give notification to neighboring properties within 200 feet of the dwelling in which the business will be operated. The Director of Planning and Community Development is to send out such notifications at least ten (10) days prior to the application going before the Planning Commission. "Home Office" applications forwarded to the Planning Commission must give same notification. 
110.8. Posting of Property. A "Home Office" or "Home Occupation" does not require posting of the property. A "Residential Business" must post a sign in a conspicuous place in the front yard of the dwelling no less than 10 days prior to the application going before the Planning Commission. Such sign to be posted will be furnished by the Director of Planning and Community Development to the applicant. The sign will be no less than 24"×32" in size and of a bright color with bold black lettering. The Director of Planning and Community Development will complete the sign by stating the purpose of the posting together with the time, date and place of the Planning Commission meeting. 
110.9 Signs and Advertising. There shall be no signs allowed for any home office, home occupation or residential business within the City of Kingsland. No advertisement shall be placed in any media (T.V., radio, newspapers, etc.) containing the address of the property. 
110.10 Manufacture and/or Sale of Firearms/Explosives. The manufacturing, sale or importing of firearms will not be allowed under any home occupation classification. No product may be manufactured, sold or imported which contain explosive materials, including but not limited to bullets. 
110.11 Affidavits for Each Classification. Each applicant must complete and sign an Affidavit for the particular home occupation/business he/she is applying for. An example of the Affidavit for each classification is attached hereto and made a part hereof. {Affidavits are available in the office of the Director of Planning and Community Development and not attached as stated} 
110.12 Permits and Procedure. 
1) "Residential Business" : The application, when completed and received by the Director of Planning and Community Development, will be put on the Planning Commission Agenda for the appropriate meeting. The Agenda must be published once a week in the legal section of the local newspaper, beginning no less than 15 days prior to the meeting in which the application will be heard. Recommendation for approval or denial will be made by the Planning Commission at that meeting. It will then go before the City Council for final approval or denial at the next meeting of the City Council following the Planning Commission's recommendation. 
Once a home occupation permit has been issued for any of the above home occupations, the Director of Planning and Community Development will advise the City's "business license department" so a business license may be issued upon receipt of a completed application for that license. When the business license is issued it is to state on that license that a "Home Office", "Home Occupation" or a "Residential Business" permit has been issued. 
110.13 Permit Renewals and/or Expirations. 
1) A "Home Office" permit will remain in effect for as long as the applicant resides at the address given on the application and the type of home office stated on the application does not change. Should the home office applicant move to a different location, or the type of business changes from that stated on the application, the home office permit shall be automatically terminated. However, in the event of death of the applicant, should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home office occupation, written notice to that effect shall be given to the Director of Planning and Community Development, who may authorize continuation of that permit. 
2) A "Home Occupation" permit shall remain in effect for as long as the applicant resides at the address given on the application and the type of home occupation stated on the application does not change. If the Community Planning & Development Director receives complaints regarding the home occupation, the applicant holding the license shall be required to renew his license prior to December 31 of the calendar year, or the Director may take immediate action as set out below. However, if the applicant moves from the address given on the application or the type of home occupation changes from that stated on the application, the home business permit shall be automatically terminated. 
3) A "Residential Business" permit shall remain in effect for as long as the applicant resides at the address given on the application and the type of residential business stated on the application does not change. If the Community Planning & Development Director receives complaints regarding the residential business, the applicant holding the license shall be required to renew his license prior to December 31 of the calendar year, or the Director may take immediate action as set out below. However, if the applicant moves from the address given on the application or the type of home occupation changes from that stated on the application, the home business permit shall be automatically terminated. 
Any of the above home occupation permits will be automatically terminated if the conditions set out in this Section 110 are not complied with, and after an investigation by the Director of Planning and Community Development and/or the Code Enforcement Officer into the alleged non-compliance. The applicant will then be notified by the Director of Planning and Community Development and/or Code Enforcement Office as to the findings of the investigation and the status of the permit. 
110.14 Appeal Process. If an applicant or a neighbor of an applicant is in disagreement with a decision made by the Planning Commission, the complainant should submit a written complaint of appeal within fourteen (14) days of the decision in question to the Director of Planning and Community Development, who will review and investigate the complaint. It will then be handled as follows: 
2) Should the complaint be against a decision made by the Planning Commission, it will be submitted by the Director of Planning and Community Development to the City Clerk for placement on the next available Council Meeting. A decision by City Council will be made within 30 days from its receipt of the appeal. Once a decision has been reached, the Director of Planning and Community Development will notify the complainant by certified mail return receipt requested of the decision made. 
110.15 Use Allowed in Each Classification. 
1) "HOME OFFICE" - Uses allowed in the home office classification are, but not necessarily limited to, the following, none of which may have clients coming to the residence: 
Routine office clerical procedures (secretarial - typing, word processing, etc.) 
Routine bookkeeping services 
Telephone answering service 
Any business outside of the home where the telephone is required for setting up appointments (i.e.: house cleaning, pet sitting) 
2) "HOME OCCUPATION" - Uses allowed in the home occupation classification are, but not necessarily limited, to the following, none of which may have clients coming to the residence and, if applicable, all sales of manufactured and/or ready-made products must be made outside of the home: 
• Any uses permitted under "Home Office" 
• Art Studio 
• Bakery good (cakes, pies, etc.) 
• Catering service 
• Computer programming 
• Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Tupperware, etc.) 
• Dressmaking (sewing, alterations, etc.) 
• Financial Planning 
• Flower arranging 
• Home crafts 
• Home cooking and preserving 
• House painting and/or repairs 
• Laundry/ironing service 
• Photo developing 
• Upholstering 
3) "RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS" - Uses allowed in the home business classification are, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 
• Any uses permitted under "Home Office" and "Home Occupation" but will allow clients to come to the home 
• Instrument instruction provided that no instrument may be amplified, limited to one student at a time 
• Small appliance repair 
• Tutoring, limited to one student at a time 
110.16 Uses not Allowed in any Classification. Uses not allowed in any home occupation classification are, but not necessarily limited to, the following, unless such is allowed under Special Uses (Section 104.16): 
Auto/boat repairs, painting 
Barber/beauty shops 
Day care centers 
Engine repair 
Funeral homes 
Gift Shops 
Professional medical office, including dental 
Major appliance repairs within the home premises 
Massage parlors 
Welding or machine shops 
110.17 Special Uses Permitted within Certain Zoning Districts. Some uses will require a Special Use Permit. Please refer to the following sections of the Kingsland Land Development Ordinance: 
1) R-1 Zoning - Section 60.1.3 
2) R-2 Zoning - Section 60.2.3 
3) R-3 Zoning - Section 60.3.3 
110.18 Non-Conforming Home Occupations. 
1) Definition: A non-conforming home occupation is one which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the effective date of this ordinance but is no longer allowed because of the application of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
2) Remedy: Upon expiration of the current non-conforming home occupation's license, the owner must reapply for a home occupation and conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2015-09, 6-8-2015 ) 
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted Sept. 22, 2014, amended Art. XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XII, §§ 120, 121, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 120. - Signs. 
120.1 Purpose and Intent . 
1) In General . The regulation of, size, placement and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities in the City of Kingsland without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Signs are recognized as a development standard in keeping with other development standards such as uses permitted, building setbacks, minimum parking requirements, minimum lot size, minimum landscaping, maximum unit density, etc. It is, therefore, the intention of the City of Kingsland to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: 
a) Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
b) Enhance the economy, business and industry of the City by promoting reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs. 
c) Restrict signs and lights which increase visual clutter, or increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision or creating undue visual distraction. 
d) Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use and architectural characteristics. 
120.1.1 Intent . As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signs and not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, anyone planning a sign is strongly encouraged to consider: 
1. The character of the proposed sign and the audience for which the sign is designed. The applicant is urged to think not only of the sign itself, but also the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. 
2. The character of the sign structure, that is, the physical means of supporting the sign, and whether that structure could be made an integral part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element. 
Before applying for a permit or erecting an exempted sign, anyone contemplating a sign is also encouraged to contact the Department of Community Planning and Development of the City of Kingsland and/or a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for advice or assistance in planning a sign. 
120.1.2 Jurisdiction . This ordinance shall apply to all properties located within the corporate limits of Kingsland, Georgia. This ordinance shall not relate to the copy or message on athletic field scoreboards, official signs of any government, gravestones, commemorative plaques, or display of construction not defined herein as a sign. 
120.1.3 Applicability of Other Code Requirements . 
1) All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and/or maintained in strict conformity with the building and electrical codes adopted by the City of Kingsland. 
2) If any provisions or requirements of this Ordinance are found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this ordinance or of any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence. 
120.1.4 Variances . Variances from the provisions of this ordinance may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and recommended by the Planning Commission in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in the City of Kingsland Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. Once considered and recommended by the Planning Commission, such variance shall go before the City Council for final approval. The granting of a variance shall not establish precedence in the consideration of any other variance request. 
120.2 Definitions . Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the zoning ordinance (Zoning and Land Development Ordinance) of the City shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in this section. Words not defined herein shall be defined in accordance with Webster's Dictionary, latest edition. 
A-FRAME SIGN: A sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided, and normally not permanently attached to the ground. 
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity available on or off the premises where such sign and/or sign structure is located. Off-premise signs with content denoting availability of advertising space are not considered abandoned. 
ADVERTISE: To inform; to notify; to announce; or attract public attention in order to arouse desire to purchase or invest. 
ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any structure or device, situated upon or attached to real property, which is erected or intended for the purpose of advertising. 
AIR AND GAS FILLED DEVICE: Any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure, including but not limited to balloons, blimps, etc. 
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign or display manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means. Animated signs include the following types: 
(1) Naturally energized: A sign whose motion is activated by wind or other atmospheric impingement. Wind driven signs include flags, banners, pennants, streamers, metallic disks, or other similar devices designed to move in the wind. 
(2) Manually energized: A sign whose motion is activated human or animal action. 
(3) Mechanically energized: A sign manifesting a repetitious pre-programmed physical movement or rotation in either one or a series of planes activated by means of mechanically based drives. 
(4) Electrically energized: Illuminated signs whose motion or visual impression of motion is activated primarily by electronic means. Electrically energized animated signs are of two types: 
(a) Flashing signs: Illuminated signs exhibiting a preprogrammed repetitious cyclical interruption of illumination from one or more sources in which the duration of the period of illumination (on phase) is either the same as or less than the duration of the period of darkness (off phase), and in which the intensity of illumination varies from zero (off) to 100 percent (on) during the programmed cycle. 
(b) Movement signs: Illuminated signs exhibiting the illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed repetitious sequential switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns. 
AREA OF SIGN (SIGN AREA) (COPY AREA): The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. Back-to-back signs (double-faced signs), only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area where the sign faces arc parallel. 
AWNINGS: See "Canopy". 
BACK-TO-BACK SIGN: A sign constructed on a single set of supports with messages visible on any side, provided that double message boards are physically contiguous. Only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area (see "area of sign above). 
BALLOON: See "Air and Gas Filled Device" above. 
BANNER/PENNANT: A temporary sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind, excluding flags, emblems, and insignia of political, professional, religious, educational or corporate organizations provided that such flags, emblems and insignia are displayed for non-commercial purposes. 
BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
BENCH SIGN: A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building, the date and incidental information about its construction which is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Director of Community Planning and Development of the City of Kingsland. or his authorized representative. 
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a free-standing sign. 
CANOPY/MARQUEE: Any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. (This is usually related to, but not limited to, being located over a sidewalk, or walkway, or vehicle access area.) 
CANOPY/MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a canopy/marquee. 
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign on which message copy is changed manually in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols and other similar characters or changeable pictorial panels. 
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product service, or other commercial activity. 
COMMERCIAL/OFFICE CENTER: A single parcel of land containing two (2) or more businesses or establishments, including all forms of retail, wholesale, and services. 
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: An on-premise sign announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project. In all instances, this is a "temporary sign", to be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project. Also see "Project Sign" below. 
COPY: The wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
DILAPIDATED SIGN: Any sign which is structurally unsound, has defective parts or is in need of painting or maintenance. 
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: An unofficial or non-standard traffic control sign, containing no commercial message except logos, intended to direct or regulate the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. This includes, but is not limited to, "enter", "exit", "drive through", and directional arrow signs. These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building. 
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign which gives the name and/or occupation of the occupants of a building, or identifies the particular use of a building. 
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial, industrial, institutional, educations, office, business, or financial entity. 
EXISTING SIGN: Any sign that was erected, mounted or displayed prior to the adoption of this amendment to the Sign Regulations, as previously adopted. 
FACADE: The entire building wall, including main street wall face, and parapet, facial, windows, doors, canopy and roof on any complete elevation. 
FIXED PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a flat sign, which extends outward for more than six (6) inches from the facade of any building and is rigidly affixed thereto. 
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
FLAT SIGN: A sign erected parallel to and extending not more than twelve inches (12") from the facade of any building to which it is attached and supported throughout its entire length by the facade of the building and not extend above the building. 
FLASHING SIGN: See "Animated Sign" above. 
FREE-STANDING SIGN: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. 
GOVERNMENTAL SIGNS: Any sign approved, authorized, erected and maintained by State or local governmental authorities. (Also see "Municipal Sign" below) 
GROUND SIGN: A free-standing sign which has no air space between the signage copy area and the ground surface. 
HEIGHT: The distance from the ground to the top of the sign as measured between the further-most points. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any local historic district designed by the City of Kingsland, including any National Register historic districts within the City limits. 
HISTORIC SIGN: Any animated neon sign over thirty (30) years old. any existing barber pole or any other sign so designated by the City of Kingsland. Extensions, additions and embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign. 
HOME OCCUPATION SIGNS: A wall sign for a legally existing home occupation on residential premises, containing no commercial message except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign located, if allowed in the Home Occupation Ordinance of the City of Kingsland. 
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign depicting the name of a building and/or the address of an establishment on the premises where the sign is located. The name and/or address may be included as part of another signage type. 
ILLEGAL SIGN or ILLEGALLY ERECTED SIGN: Any sign which is erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this ordinance or previously adopted ordinance or code; or was permitted but which has not been properly erected in accordance with its permit application and approved sign permit; does not meet the requirements of this code and which has not received legal nonconforming status; a sign which has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment, and so declared by the Building Official. 
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent or translucent material from a source of light within such sign, including but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs. 
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A general information sign that has a purpose secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. This includes but is not limited to credit cards accepted, official notice of services as required by law, trade affiliations, business hours, "telephone", "self-service", etc. These type signs are typically located on doors, windows, or building walls. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the parcel on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
LOT: See "Parcel" below. 
MANSARD SIGN: Any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to the building surface. Since the sign is to be mounted parallel to and within the limits of the building, it is not deemed to be a roof sign. 
MARQUEE: See "Canopy" above. 
MOVING SIGN: See "Animated Sign" above. 
MUNICIPAL SIGN: Any sign erected on city-owned property with the consent of the city building official. 
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Either illegal (as defined above) or legal which is either: 
(1) A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations; or 
(2) A sign which does not conform to the sign code requirements but for which a special permit has been issued. 
NON-PROFIT ACTIVITY: An activity, project, operation or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
OFF-PREMISE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a building, profession, product, service, activity, or entertainment not conducted, sold, or offered on the property upon which the sign is located. 
OFFICE CENTER/COMMERCIAL: See "Commercial/Office Center" above. 
ON-PREMISE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a building, profession, product, service, activity, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on the property upon which the said sign is located. 
PAINTED WALL SIGN: Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
PARAPET: A vertical false front or wall extension above the roof line. 
PARCEL (LOT): Any piece, standard lot, or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a recorded legal instrument and recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court of Camden County, Georgia. A parcel may include more than one contiguously platted lot under common ownership which is identified as a single unit on official tax maps, and in such case the word "parcel" shall refer to that unit of land so identified. 
PENNANT: See "Banner" above. 
PERMANENT SIGN: A sign permanently affixed to a building or to the ground. 
PERSON: An individual, or any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state or national election or referendum. This includes but is not limited to urging voter support for or in opposition to a particular issue, political party or candidate for public office. 
PORTABLE SIGN: A mobile/temporary sign supported by its own frame or trailer type frame, with or without wheels, which is designed to be transported from one place to the other and not permanently attached to the ground. 
PREMISES: An area of land with its appurtenances and building which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal building. 
PROJECT SIGN: Any sign erected and maintained on the premises temporarily while undergoing construction by an architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services or material. Also see "Construction Sign" above. 
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which is attached to the building wall and which horizontally extends more than twelve (12) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE: The line where the property meets the public right-of-way at a public street or public waterway, provided that this definition shall not include unimproved alleys, easements or other similar dedicated uses. 
PUBLIC SERVICE SIGN: A sign designed to render a public service such as but not limited to "time and temperature" signs and "flashing news" signs. 
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, highway, road, path or right-of-way, whether privately or publicly owned, which is designed, or used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic either by public right or custom, or by invitation of two (2) or more common owners. 
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located, including but not limited to "For Rent", "For Lease", "For Sale", "Open House", etc. 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary sign bearing information about a subdivision or other residential development during the time its lots or homes are being offered for sale or lease. 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Includes all land zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MH and PUD. 
REVOLVING SIGN: See "Animated Sign" above. 
ROOF: The exterior upper covering of the top of a building. 
ROOF SIGN: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and projects above the roof of the building if the building has a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches. 
SETBACK: The distance required between the property line and any building,. structure, or sign, as measured along the shortest straight line between them. 
SIDEWALK, SANDWICH OR A-FRAME SIGN: A sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. These signs are normally not permanently attached to the ground. 
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem, painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
SIGN NUMBER: For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component or element shall be considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign or free-standing sign with identical copy on both sides (faces) of the sign and both sign faces being less than 36 inches apart, shall be construed as a single sign. 
SIGN CONSTRUCTION: Any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
SNIPE SIGN: A sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. Snipe signs shall not include "keep out", "posted", or "no trespassing" signs. 
STREET: Any public or private right-of-way for vehicular traffic, excluding alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
STREET FRONTAGE: The width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
SUBDIVISION SIGN: A permanent free-standing sign or wall sign identifying an approved subdivision, neighborhood, or residential complex. 
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which must be removed at either the expiration of a specific number of days or at the time a specific event occurs or within a specific time interval after a specific event occurs. 
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN: A standard sign or electronic device (such as a traffic signal, stop sign, one-way, handicap, no parking, fire lane, etc.) for the purpose of directing or regulating traffic and/or pedestrians. 
UNLAWFUL SIGN: See "Illegal Sign" above. 
WALL FACE: A measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or cave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
WALL SIGN: A sign which is affixed or attached to an exterior wall of a building or structure, extending no more than 12" beyond the wall and which displays only one sign surface. 
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, excluding identification and incidental signs, placed inside or upon a window, containing a commercial message, and intended to be seen from the exterior. 
120.3 Permitting, Maintenance and Enforcement. 
120.3.1 Permit Required . Except as otherwise provided herein, it will be unlawful for any person or firm to, or cause to erect, enlarge, move, convert, or replace any sign in the City of Kingsland without first obtaining a sign permit from the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
A sign permit shall be required for a new business making any changes on an existing sign which has previously been permitted. 
120.3.2 Permit not Required for Repairs, Maintenance. A sign permit will not be required for the repair or maintenance of a conforming sign for which a permit has already been issued, provided the sign is not modified in any way different from its original condition, including changes to permanent sign copy. This section will not require a sign permit for changes to sign copy on any off-premise sign so long as the copy material is lightweight, and does not increase the size of the sign face. This section does not apply to a new business making any changes on an existing sign (see above). 
120.3.3 Application for Sign Permit. All applications for sign permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the City to the Director of Community Planning and Development. The application shall set forth in writing a complete description of the sign and shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
1. Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner. 
2. Name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor or installer. 
3. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the lot or parcel on which the sign is located, if different from the above. 
4. Street address and current zoning of the property location for the proposed sign. 
5. Scale plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign indicating all applicable dimensions, including the sign's relation to property lines, street rights-of-way, and other structures. 
6. Construction drawings outlining the scope and structural details of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports, footings, and materials to be used. 
7. Electrical permit, if applicable. 
8. Written agreement to indemnify and hold the City harmless for all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
9. Landscaping plan for on-premises free-standing signs, when applicable. 
120.3.4 Fees . Sign permit fees and will be due and payable prior to the issuance of the Sign Permit. Fees for Sign Permits are as follows: 
Wall Signs ..... $50.00 
Ground Signs ..... $75.00 
Pylon Signs according to height: 
20′ to 50′ ..... $100.00 
51′ to 75′ ..... $135.00 
76′ to 100′ ..... $175.00 
101′ and Over ..... $250.00 
120.3.5 Permit Issuance and Duration. The Director of Community Planning and Development will issue to any applicant, upon receipt of a completed application and accompanying material for a sign which meets the requirements of this ordinance, and upon payment of the required fee, a written sign permit evidencing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations. The written sign permit, or notification of denial, shall be made available to the applicant within five (5) working days from the date of application. 
A permit for a permanent sign will expire and become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of three (3) months from the date of issuance, and completed within six (6) months from the date of issuance. 
Issuance of a sign permit will in no way prevent the Director of Community Planning and Development from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if upon further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
120.3.6 Maintenance . 
(1) All signs shall be maintained as follows: 
(a) Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and maintained at all times so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. This includes but is not limited to keeping the sign free from faulty wiring, loose fastenings, and sharp or otherwise dangerous protrusions. 
(b) No trash or rubbish will be allowed to accumulate in the area around a sign and all weeds shall be kept out. 
(2) Removal of abandoned signs: 
Any abandoned sign(s) and/or sign structure(s) shall be removed by the property owner or sign owner prior to or within thirty (30) days after written notification from a designated official of the City. If the property owner or sign owner fails to comply within thirty (30) days after written notification, the City may cause the removal of the sign at the property owner's or sign owner's expense. 
120.3.7 Enforcement . 
1) This Ordinance shall be enforced as provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kingsland, and each day of violation shall be regarded as a separate offense. 
2) Removal of Signs: Any of the following signs shall be immediately removed upon notification from the Building Inspector or his authorized representative: 
(a) A sign which is classified as unlawful under the terms of this ordinance. 
(b) A sign which does not conform to the Standard Building Code. 
3) Revocation of Permit: A sign permit shall be revoked if it is found not to be in compliance with this ordinance due to misinformation or significant error on the sign permit application. 
4) Impoundment of Signs: 
(a) The Director and his staff shall have the authority to remove all signs, without notice to the owners thereof, placed within any street or highway right-of-way, signs attached to trees, fencepost, telephone and utility poles, other natural features, or signs otherwise prohibited by this article, and to impound them for a period of ten (10) days. 
(b) The owner of a sign impounded may recover same upon the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each sign, prior to the expiration of the ten-day impoundment period; in the event it is not claimed within ten (10) days, the Director shall have the authority to dispose of such sign. 
5) Interpretation and Conflict: 
(a) Minimum Requirements: The standards and provisions of this article shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to uphold the purposes of this article. 
(b) Other City Requirements: Whenever this article imposes a higher standard than required by any other City ordinance or requirement, the provisions of this article shall govern. Whenever any other City ordinance or requirement imposes a higher standard than required by this article, the provisions of such City ordinance or requirement shall govern. 
(c) Private Restrictions. Whenever this article imposes a higher standard than required by casements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(d) Statutes. When the provisions of any applicable state or federal statute impose a higher standard than required by this article, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
120.4 General Regulations. 
120.4.1 Prohibited Signs . The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited within the City limits: 
(1) Signs displaying any words, characters, or illustrations of an obscene, indecent or immoral nature as fined by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kingsland, Georgia. 
(2) Abandoned or dilapidated signs. 
(3) Signs which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws. 
(4) Any sign on or towed behind a boat, raft, aircraft or helicopter. 
(5) Permanent A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk, or curb signs. Any such signs shall be removed nightly, shall not encroach on any handicap access, and shall be at least four (4) feet from any automobile travel path. 
(6) Animated signs, including those that flash, blink, change image, or show any form of movement, excluding historic signs and those officially designated for public service except as permitted by section 120.9(5), 
(7) Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings. 
(8) Signs which make use of the words "stop", "look", "danger", or any word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic. 
(9) Unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or create a hazard or nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(10) Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and obviously parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. 
(11) No sign of any kind shall be erected or displayed in any salt marsh areas on any land subject to periodic inundation by tidal saltwater. 
(12) Snipe signs. 
(13) Roof signs or any non-freestanding sign which extends above the roof line of a building. 
(14) Tethered balloons or other inflatable signs located in a commercial district other than the C-1, Central Business District for one week. Beyond a week, balloons must be permitted as temporary signs. One week limit is measured over 3-month period. 
(15) Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor. 
(16) Signs with lighting or control mechanisms which cause radio, television, or other communications interference. 
(17) Motion picture mechanisms used in such a manner as to permit or allow images to be visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(18) Except as otherwise provided no sign, whether temporary or permanent, except by a public agency, is permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(19) Signs painted on or attached to trees, fencepost, rocks or other natural features, telephone or utility poles or painted on the roofs of buildings visible from any public thoroughfare. 
(20) Search lights and beacons. 
(21) Strings of lights, pennants, or other similar attention-getting devices. 
120.4.2 Exempt Signs. Except as otherwise provided, the following on-premise signs may be erected without securing a permit, provided that each is in accordance with the prescribed conditions and all other applicable codes and regulations: 
(1) One (1) professional nameplate for each establishment. Each professional nameplate shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(2) One (1) separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of two (2) square feet. The purpose of the sign is to identify the establishment's street address, suite or unit number, etc. 
(3) Informational bulletin boards for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when located on the premises of said institution and affixed to a building wall. Bulletin boards may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line when said institution is located in a residential district. 
(4) Legal notices and official instruments. 
(5) Flags, subject to the maximum area limitations of Table B or C, and the following provisions: 
(a) Limited to official flags of the United States, Georgia. Camden County. City of Kingsland, or any other flag sanctioned by the City of Kingsland. 
(b) Flag poles shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height (total length) and flags must be flown in accordance with the standard protocol. 
(c) Government owned parcels are exempt from total flag area limitations. 
(6) Decorative flags, banners, and bunting for city wide celebrations, conventions, and commemorations when specifically authorized by the City Council for a prescribed period of time. 
(7) Holiday lights and decorations. 
(8) One (1) "building marker" per building. 
(9) Non-advertising directional signs or symbols (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, or no trespassing) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property not to exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(10) Identification signs at the entrance drive of residences, estates, farms, ranches and plantations which do not exceed two (2) square feet in area. 
(11) One (1) non-illuminated real estate sign per street frontage, each containing a maximum of two (2) sign faces back to back, and provided as follows: 
(a) Maximum sign area (per face) shall be limited to six (6) square feet in all residential districts, and twenty-four (24) square feet in all non-residential districts. 
(b) Multiple listing strips, sale pending, and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area requirements. 
(c) One (1) on-premise open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, may be allowed in addition to the above area requirements. Similar off-premise signs for directional purposes may be allowed at street intersections on other private properties with the consent of the property owner. These signs may not be erected in a public right-of-way and they must be removed when the premises are no longer open for inspection. 
(d) All real estate signs shall be removed when ownership or occupancy has changed and the property is no longer for sale, rent or lease. 
(12) Signs for temporary garage sales, yard sales, and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions: 
(a) A maximum of 5 signs may be used for notifying the public of temporary garage sales and yard sales. 
(b) Each sign shall be no more than four (4) square feet, (24"x24") and each sign shall contain the following information: 
a. General statement of a 'Garage Sale' or 'Yard Sale' 
b. Location of the garage or yard sale 
c. Dates and time which the garage/yard sale shall be occurring 
(c) Sign height is limited to three (3) feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign. Signs cannot be affixed to stop signs, street signs, utility poles, speed limit signs or any other object permanently existing In the City Right of Way (R-O-W). 
(d) Signs must be placed in the ground utilizing a pole, stake, rods, etc. 
(e) Signs may be placed in the City of Kingsland street R-O-W provided they are not obstructing the view of traffic from any direction and must be at least 1 foot from the curbing of the road. 
(f) Garage sales, yard sales, and the like shall be limited to operating hours of 6:00 AM - 7:00 PM on any given day. 
(g) All signs from said garage/yard sale shall be removed from the locations within 24 hours from the time of the end of the sale. 
(h) Any violation of this section for temporary garage sales and yard sales shall be subject to a fine of $25.00. 
(13) One (1) single-sided construction sign per street frontage located on property where building is actually in progress under a current building permit. This shall be a freestanding sign not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, twelve (12) square feet, in all residential districts, thirty-two (32) square feet in all non-residential districts, and shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines. The sign may include the names of persons and firms performing services or labor, or supplying materials to the premises. Such sign must be removed before a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or structure on the premise is issued. Construction signs shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to commencement of construction. 
(14) Political signs provided as follows: 
(a) The sign shall not be displayed earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the primary election, general election or referendum it concerns. 
(b) The sign must be removed no later than seven (7) days following the date of the primary election, general election or referendum it concerns. The owner of the property on which the sign is located and the candidate will be responsible for removing the sign. 
(c) The sign shall be located entirely on private property. Signs shall not be located, in whole or in part, on any public lands or public right-of-way and shall not be attached to any sign or utility pole, rock, or any form of vegetation. 
(d) The number of signs displayed shall be restricted to one (1) single faced or one double faced sign per parcel per candidate for each property line facing a public road. If a property has more than 200 feet of frontage, one sign shall be allowed per 200 feet of frontage. 
(e) Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area in all residential districts and twenty-four (24) square feet in all non-residential districts. 
(f) The Director of Community Planning and Development or designated representative shall, without notice, immediately remove or cause to be removed any and all political signs in violation of this section. The removal will be at the expense of the candidate and the owner of the property on which the sign is located. 
(g) All political signs must also meet corresponding sign type regulations for the zoning district in which the sign is located. 
(15) Window signs which advertise promotional activities, services, and goods or products available within the building. These signs shall still be subject to the maximum sign area limitations for window signs in Table B. 
(16) Signs incorporated on machinery and equipment at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, and which only identify or advertise the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment. This includes signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths and gasoline pumps. 
(17) One (1) directory sign per building, which contains no commercial messages of any kind, which is attached to the building wall and limited to a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet. 
(18) Traffic control signs erected on public or private property which meet Department of Transportation standards and contain no commercial message of any kind. Signs located on private property shall not exceed two (2) square feet. 
(19) Works of art which do not contain a commercial message. 
(20) Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. This may include signs for realtors, delivery trucks, lawn service, etc. 
(21) Non-advertising directional signs or symbols ("entrance", "exit", or "no trespassing" etc.) located on and pertaining to a parcel of private property, none to exceed four (4) square feet in area, or a directional sign for churches, provided that such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet and shall be within one (1) mile of said church. 
(22) Historical signs or markers. 
(23) Municipal signs. 
(24) One (1) civic club "Welcome to Kingsland" sign per state or Federal highway entrance to City provided it contains five (5) or more civic club logos of approximately the same size, has no commercial logo or message and has a sign area not exceeding fifty (50) feet. Design must be approved. 
(25) Window signs that cover less than ten (10) percent of a window. 
(26) Any information sign required by State or Federal law. 
(27) Signs for companies providing services to posted property limited to a maximum size of three (3) square feet for a maximum of 30 days after which no sign is allowed for that provider for at least 60 days. 
(28) Signs for companies providing services to property limited to a maximum size of 1/3 square foot per sign placed within 5 feet of the primary dwelling, and limited to a maximum of five (5) signs (one per company and/or service). 
120.5 Location in General. 
(1) All signs shall be located on and over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this Ordinance. 
(2) No sign shall be attached to any utility pole, fence, rock, tree or other form of vegetation, or any type traffic sign, sign post, signal or device. 
(3) All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(4) No sign shall be attached to or placed against a building in such a way as to prevent egress through any door or window required or designed for access to any building; nor shall any sign be attached to or obstruct a fire escape, or interfere with openings required for proper light or ventilation. 
(5) All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with National Electrical Code specifications. In no case shall any sign be installed within three (3) feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
120.6 Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District. See "Table A"—page 130. 
120.7 Maximum Size and Number. 
(1) Height . Unless otherwise provided, no freestanding sign shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(2) Number . Freestanding on-premise signs shall be limited to one (1) per parcel collector or arterial street frontage. 
(3) Sign Area, Single-Use Parcels. Except for the exempted signs listed in Table B, the maximum total area for all signs on each parcel shall not exceed the "Maximum Total Square Feet" listed in Table B. This includes both on-premise and off-premise signs. The maximum total area for all signs of each sign type (including the exempted signs listed in Table B) on each parcel shall be as indicated in Table B. Establishments which front or face more than one (1) collector or arterial street frontage shall be entitled to additional signage equal to one half that shown in Table B. Signage on neither street shall exceed that in Table B. If signage is established on the corner of the two (2) frontages, the signage allowance is one quarter more than shown in Table B, but only one freestanding sign structure shall be allowed. 
See "Table B"—page 132 
(4) Commercial/Office Centers . Building signs for each establishment shall be limited to the maximum sign areas listed in Table C. Establishments within the center which front or face more than one (1) street frontage shall not be entitled to additional sign square footage. Sign area allowances are non-transferable from one establishment to another. 
See "Table C"—page 134 
(5) Large Single-Use and Commercial/Office Center Developments . Developments exceeding 60,000 square feet shall have an additional freestanding signage allotment ten (10) percent for each additional 50,000 square feet of enclosed space. Individual stores exceeding 60,000 square feet within centers shall have an additional building sign allotment of ten (10) percent for each additional 50,000 square feet. 
TABLE A PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT 

 
Please see Note (a), (b), etc. 
TABLE B MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (SQUARE FEET) BY SIGN TYPE  AND ZONING DISTRICT  SINGLE USES 

 
KEY 
* = For each building side, the greater of either (a) or (b) below: 
(1)  Fifty (50) square feet 
(2)  One (1) square foot per two linear feet of building frontage, not to exceed 250 square feet. 
+ = Window signs requiring a sign permit are subject to the "Maximum Total Square Feet" requirement for each parcel. All window signs combined (permitted and exempt) shall not exceed 30% of total window surface or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
Please see Note (a), (b), etc. 
TABLE C MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (SQUARE FEET) BY SIGN TYPE  AND ZONING DISTRICT  COMMERCIAL/OFFICE CENTERS 

 
KEY TO TABLE C 
* = For each store/unit front, the greater of either (a) or (b): 
(a)  Fifty (50) square feet. 
(b)  One (1) square foot per two (2) linear feet of unit frontage, not to exceed 250 square feet. 
+ = Window signs requiring a sign permit are subject to the "Maximum Total Square Feet" requirements for each establishment. All window signs combined (permitted and exempt) shall not exceed 30% of total window surface or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
Please see Note (a), (b), etc. 
_____
NOTES TO TABLES A, B AND C: 
(a) May include only building name, date of construction or historical data on historic site. 
(b) Only name of building and/or address of establishment allowed on sign. 
(c) No commercial message of any kind allowed which is legible from any location off the parcel on which the sign is located. 
(d) No commercial message allowed except advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
(e) Subject to special regulations for banners as described in this Ordinance. 
(f) Limited to flags of the United States, Georgia, Camden County, City of Kingsland, or any other flag sanctioned by the City of Kingsland. 
(g) Subject to special regulations for portable signs as described in this Ordinance. 
(h) Overall height shall be limited to a maximum of eight (8) feet. 
(i) These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building or wall, and there may be more than one sign per parcel. Each sign shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) square feet. If freestanding, the sign shall be limited to a maximum of 2 ½ feet high. 
(j) Maximum of one (1) under canopy sign per building entrance. 
(k) Gasoline stations shall be allowed up to four (4) square feet. 
(l) Maximum of one (1) under canopy sign per street frontage, per establishment. 
(m) For each establishment. 
(n) Plus live (5) square feet per tenant when tenant identification panels are included. The sign shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8) feet and in no case shall the total sign area exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
_____ 
(6) Sign Area Height Computations . The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(a) Area of Single-Faced Signs: The area shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display shelf. 
(b) Area of Multifaced Signs: The area shall be computed by adding together the area of all individual sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than thirty-six (36) inches apart, the two faces shall be considered one sign and the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(c) Height: The height of a freestanding shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction, or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower. 
120.8 Sign Setbacks . 
(1) Unless otherwise provided, no freestanding or portable sign at its nearest point shall be closer than ten (10) feet (perpendicular line ground distance) from a street right-of-way line or property line. This setback will provide for future bicycle paths or sidewalks. 
(2) All freestanding signs containing copy area between a height of three (3) feet and nine (9) feet above ground shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines, or the intersection of a street right-of-way line with a driveway pavement edge. Sign supports in excess of two (2) feet in diameter or which cumulatively provides less than 70% visibility, shall be subject to this same setback requirement. 
120.9 Special Signage Types. 
(1) Portable Signs: In addition to all permitting procedures and other applicable regulations of this Ordinance, all existing and future portable signs shall comply with all of the following: 
(a) Portable signs shall be limited to one per parcel and shall only be used in lieu of a permanent freestanding sign for a period not to exceed one (1) month from the date of permit issuance, or until the permanent sign is installed, whichever comes first. 
(b) Portable signs shall not be erected or placed in a required parking space and must be securely tied down in accordance with the Standard Building Code. 
(c) All existing portable signs shall be removed within one (1) month from the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(d) If lighted, portable signs shall be internally lit, and: 
Must have UL Label, or equivalent; 
Electrical service must be provided from a building in accordance with all applicable electrical codes and shall be approved by the Building Official; and 
Portable signs may NOT flash or blink. 
(2) Banners: Banners not exceeding a cumulative total of 100 square feet may be permitted on private property for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. After the banner approval period has expired, an individual establishment may not request approval of another banner for at least three (3) months. Banners must be attached to the building structure and shall not be freestanding. 
(3) Menu Signs at Drive-Through Restaurants: One (1) sign per drive-through traffic lane may be used to display menus for restaurant drive-through windows. Each sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, eight (8) feet in height, and if illuminated, the sign must be internally lit. 
(4) Subdivision Signs: Subdivision signs and any accompanying landscaping shall not be located in a public right-of-way. 
(5) Animated Signs: 
(a) Mechanically energized signs are allowed only in the C-4 zone subject to all other sign controls. 
(b) Electrically energized movement signs are allowed in the C-2 and C-4 zones subject to all other sign controls and subject to the following conditions: 
1. The animated portion of the sign will be automatically controlled by an integral light sensitive detector that will lower luminosity to not more than 0.3 foot candles (over ambient levels) as measured using a foot candle meter at a distance of 100 feet. 
2. A copy of the sign manufacturer's specifications for the luminosity will be attached to the sign application. 
3. Flashing will not be activated. 
120.10 Landscaping . All permanent on-premise freestanding signs shall have a landscaped area at the base of the sign which is a minimum of three (3) feet wide on each side, and at least the length of the sign. The landscaping shall consist of a dense vegetative ground cover or a minimum one (1) shrub per three (3) linear feet of landscaped area on each side of the sign. Landscaped areas containing shrubs greater than three (3) feet high shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the intersection of two street right-of-way lines, or intersection of a street right-of-way line with a driveway pavement edge. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Off-premise signs shall be exempt from landscaping requirements. 
120.11 Off-Premise Advertising. Unless otherwise provided, off-premise signs shall be subject to all of the following requirements in addition to all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. Where these are in conflict, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1) Off-premise advertising shall be limited to freestanding signs and shall only be allowed in the C-4 (Commercial Interchange) District. 
(2) Setbacks shall be a minimum twenty (20) feet (perpendicular line ground distance) from street right-of-way lines and ten (10) feet from side or rear property lines. 
(3) All off-premise signs shall be located a minimum of 1,250 feet measured as a radius from any other off-premise sign, regardless of location. 
(4) Structural elements of off-premise signs which contain no sign copy, including rear sides of billboards, shall be uniform in color. 
120.12 Non-Conforming Signs. 
(1) Repairs and Maintenance: Any legal non-conforming sign may be repaired or restored to its original condition, subject to the following: 
a. The cost of repairs or the restoration does not cumulatively exceed 50% of its total replacement cost. Accumulation shall begin with the effective date of this Ordinance. 
b. The repairs or restoration do not involve any change from its original permanent copy. 
c. The repairs or restoration remain subject to all other applicable regulations. 
(2) Compliance for Single Use Parcels: All legal non-conforming on-premise signs located on a single use parcel shall be removed or altered to conform with all existing sign regulations upon any of the following: 
a. The issuance of a sign permit for any new additional sign, or changes to an existing sign which result in an increase to the sign's total copy area. 
b. The issuance of a sign permit for changes in permanent sign copy to an existing on-premise sign, which exceeds the 50% cumulative total of sign areas for all legally existing on-premise signs normally requiring a permit under this Ordinance. Accumulation shall begin with the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(3) Compliance for Commercial/Office Center: Legal non-conforming signs located in commercial/office centers shall be removed or altered to conform with all existing sign regulations in the event the following occur: 
a. For non-conforming freestanding signs, the issuance of a sign permit for a new freestanding sign. 
b. For non-conforming building signs for a particular establishment, the issuance of any sign permit for that particular establishment, excluding repairs and maintenance. 
120.13 Special District Regulations. 
120.13.1 HISTORIC DISTRICT - removed 
120.13.2 C-4 (INTERCHANGE COMMERCIAL), C-ED (ENTERTAINMENT) AND C-PLMU DISTRICTS. The following signs only shall be permitted in the C-4 and C-ED Districts. 
(1) Permitted Sign Types: 
a. Non-projecting wall signs and roof signs. 
b. Ground signs including any independently supported sign structure not otherwise classified herein. 
c. Outdoor Advertising Signs (Billboard) as herein restricted. 
(2) Number, Size, Location, and Height Restrictions: Signs on walls of building (including signs attached flat against walls, painted wall signs, and project signs as herein provided) shall meet the following requirements: 
a. Wall Signs: Wall signs on front surface of buildings: The total sign face area shall not exceed 25% of the total building frontage area. 
Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from a corner. Signs attached at an angle may extend outward from the wall not more than 5 feet. 
b. Roof Signs: Not more than one (1) roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign may extend more than 25 feet from the elevation of the roof. 
Roof signs shall have a total sign face area not to exceed that provided for wall signs in sub-paragraph a above. 
c. Ground Signs: 
(i) Non-illuminated Construction Signs and Temporary Subdivision Signs are restricted to 40 square feet in area and to 20 feet in height. 
(ii) Construction Signs displaying name of building, contractor, architects, engineers, owners, finance agencies, developers, etc., are permitted but must be removed from site within 30 days of project completion. 
(iii) Temporary Subdivision Signs announcing a land subdivision development are permitted if located on premises of land being subdivided. Such sign shall not be spaced less than 300 feet apart and shall be removed when 75% of the lots are conveyed. 
(iv) Private Directional Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available, but not erected on such premises and having inscribed thereon the name of owner, developer, building or agent, are permitted provided: 
The size of such sign is not in excess of 6 square feet and not exceeding 4 feet in length. 
Not more than one such sign is erected on each 1.250 feet of right of way frontage. 
The height of such sign is not in excess of 6 feet. 
Proof of Permission from owner of location (if applicable). 
(v) For Ground Signs 20 feet or less in height, the sign area is not to exceed 40 square feet for each sign face nor a total aggregate surface area of 80 square feet. If there are visibility obstructions, this allocation can be raised up to 39 feet in height. 
(vi) One Ground Sign between 21 feet and 150 feet shall be permitted per principal use and not to exceed the areas as tabulated below: 
Between 21 feet and 39 in height shall not exceed a total aggregate sign face area of 100 square feet. 
Between 40 feet and 150 feet in height shall not exceed a total aggregate sign face area of 500 square feet. 
Note: Back-to-back/double faced signs shall compute square footage by measuring one side of the display face only. 
d. Illuminated Signs: Illuminated devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of a vehicle driver. 
120.14 Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
(1) Outdoor Advertising Signs (Billboards—I-95 Only): 
a. This Ordinance shall apply to all outdoor advertising signs abutting or visible from Interstate 95 right-of-way in the City of Kingsland. Georgia. 
b. No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
c. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
d. All signs located on sites abutting or visible from Interstate 95 right-of-way shall conform with Official Georgia Code Annotated, Section 32-6-70 seq. (The Georgia Outdoor Advertising) and shall meet all Federal and State requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code. 
e. Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six (6) months of the discontinuance of said activity. 
(2) Outdoor Advertising Signs shall meet the following requirements (I-95 only): 
a. Maximum Size. The maximum size of the sign shall be 600 square feet and the maximum outside measurements of all such signs shall be thirty (30) feet in height and fifty (50) feet in length, with or without trim. 
b. Minimum Size. The minimum size of the sign shall be 500 square feet. 
c. Illumination . All illuminated signs shall be use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited except for internal lighted and LED displays that comply with Georgia DOT regulations. 
d. Height Above Interstate Grade . All signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back) of "V" formation shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. 
e. Extrusions Prohibited . Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
f. Number of Signs Per Location . Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side) facing the same direction. 
g. Spacing . Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
h. Sign Structures . The support column of the outdoor advertising structure must be located at a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any property right-of-way line. The sign face must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property right-of-way line. 
i. Allow Three (3) Outdoor Advertising Signs Per Quadrant of an Interchange Adjacent to the Interstate Highway . These signs must be within a commercial or industrially zoned area as specified in State Law and are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. 
j. Marsh and Historic Area Locations Prohibited . No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshlands area or an area of designated historic interest. 
k. Advertisement Limitations . Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
Travel Service facilities, including lodging, gas, food and camping. 
Areas of scenic beauty. 
Public attractions, including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and 
Any combination of the above listed facilities. Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
l. On premise signs located within 100 feet of a regularly used part of the activity being advertised and located on the same property and for sale or for lease signs located on the property being advertised would not be prohibited. 
m. Any legally erected existing sign which would become non-conforming as a result of this Ordinance would be allowed to remain, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of State Laws and rules and regulations governing non-conforming signs. 
n. Nothing contained in this is intended or should be interpreted to request the removal of any existing legally erected sign. 
o. If a legally placed outdoor advertising structure is subjected to more than fifty (50) percent destruction, it may be replaced as long as the face area complies with the 600 square foot sign area. 
120.15 For Outdoor Advertising Within All Districts Where Such Signs Are a Permitted Use. These following general requirements shall be met, unless restricted by a district requirement previously specified: 
1. The support column for outdoor advertising signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and a sign face shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the established right-of-way lines of streets or other transportation or utility right-of-way. 
2. No outdoor advertising sign shall be located within 750 feet of another such sign as measured between the two closest points. 
3. Maximum sign area shall not exceed 300 square feet facing in any one direction. 
4. Maximum height shall not exceed 40 feet above adjacent street grade. 
5. No outdoor advertising shall be located within 500 feet of the property line of public schools, cemeteries, public parks, playgrounds or recreation areas, scenic areas or public buildings used primarily as places of public assembly. With respect to public schools, the 500 foot distance shall be measured from the school building or parking area, but in no event shall the sign be located nearer then 200 feet of the property line of the public school. 
6. No outdoor advertising structure shall be located within 100 feet of any property line of residential district on the same right of way. 
7. No outdoor advertising structure shall be located within 100 feet of any property line of a residential structure used for residential purposes, except an outdoor advertising sign may be located nearer than 100 feet to a residential structure with written consent of the property owner. 
8. Any legally erected existing sign which would become non-conforming as a result of this Ordinance would be allowed to remain, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of State Laws, Rules and Regulations governing non-conforming signs. 
9. Nothing contained in this is intended or should be interpreted to request the removal of any existing legally erected sign. 
10. If a legally placed outdoor advertising structure is subjected to more than fifty (50) percent destruction, it may be replaced as long as the face area complies with the 300 square foot sign area. 
11. If a non-conforming sign West of Interstate 95 on State Route 40 is subjected to fifty (50) percent destruction, it shall not be replaced. If a conforming sign located within the same area is subjected to more than fifty (50) percent destruction, it may be replaced with the sign area not to exceed 300 square feet. 
120.16 Application Requirements for Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
(1) The Director of Community Planning and Development will issue permits for signs meeting the size, height and spacing requirements of this section. Variances shall not be granted for outdoor advertising signs. 
(2) Application for construction or erections of outdoor advertising signs shall contain the following information: 
a. Name, address and telephone number of sign erector and the sign owner. 
b. A sketch showing the dimensions of the proposed outdoor advertising sign and the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures and the nearby streets, along with a photograph of the proposed sign location. 
c. Plans and specifications and structural details of construction on the ground shall be furnished. A single submission may be permitted for standardized signs. All signs must conform to the standards of the Standard Building Code and other codes that may be applicable. 
d. Any electrical permit required for electrical hook-up for sign must be obtained. 
e. A permit fee shall be due with each application for a permit. Permit shall be valid for 60 days. If construction or installation is not under way within 60 days of issue, the permit shall be void and the fee forfeited. If such application must also receive State Department of Transportation permit, said 60 day period shall begin from the date of said D.O.T. permit issue. 
f. Permits for outdoor advertising signs will not be issued for any areas within the City Limits of Kingsland along Kings Bay Road. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, 9-22-2014; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 10-23-2017) 
ARTICLE XIII. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 130.1. - Cemeteries. 
Within the districts permitting cemeteries, the following requirements shall apply. 
130.1.1. The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such a site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare. 
130.1.2. Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than twenty (20) acres. 
130.1.3. All structures shall be set back no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
130.1.4. All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines, and not less than fifty (50) feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way lines. 
130.1.5. The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
Sec. 130.2. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
Bed and Breakfast Inns shall be permitted by special exception provided the following requirements are met: 
130.3.1. The proposed use of the property will not adversely affect the immediate neighborhood. 
130.3.2. The proposed use of the property will not create noise, light or traffic conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents. 
130.3.3. No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to assure the safety of the structure, shall be made to the dwelling for the purpose of providing a Bed and Breakfast Inn. 
130.3.4. No meals other than breakfast may be served by the resident owner to paying guests. 
130.3.5. The resident owner shall keep a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests. 
130.3.6. The resident owner shall comply with all business license and revenue collection ordinances of the City of Kingsland and the State of Georgia. 
130.3.7. The building shall comply with all requirements for dwelling included in the Standard Building Code. 
130.3.8. The resident owner provides one (1) off-street parking space for every guest room. 
130.3.9. The principal use of any such structure or structures shall be residential. 
130.3.10. Any business sign shall be attached to the building or be free standing up to five (5) feet in height and shall not be larger than two (2) square feet in sign area. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE XIV. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 140. - Landscaping. 
The intent of this section shall be to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for installation and maintenance of certain landscaped areas; to protect the character and stability of residential, business, institutional and industrial areas and to conserve the value of land and building or surrounding properties and neighborhoods. 
140.1. Definitions: As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set opposite them for any and all purposes: 
(1) Encroachment - Encroachment is defined as any protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area or access way into a landscaped area. 
(2) Landscaping - Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or a combination thereof: Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or palms; and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
(3) Trees - Self-supporting woody plants of species which normally grow to an overall height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
(4) Shrubs and Hedges - A self-supporting, non-deciduous species of plants and normally grown in the City of Kingsland. 
(5) Vines - Vines are plants which normally require support to reach mature form. 
140.2. Off-street Parking and Other Vehicular Use Areas: Landscaping of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas shall conform to the minimum requirements hereinafter provided. 
(1) Installation - The owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for installing landscaping according to accepted commercial planting procedures with the quality of landscaping installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code requirements of the City of Kingsland. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment as herein provided in paragraphs 140.2.(5)(c) and 140.2.(5)(i). Qualified representatives of the City of Kingsland shall inspect all landscaping and no Certificate of Occupancy or similar authorization shall be issued prior to landscaping conforming to the requirements herein provided. 
(2) Maintenance - The owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining such landscaping in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition. The owner shall provide each landscaped area with a readily available water supply. 
(3) Plant Materials: 
(a) Plant materials used in conformance with provisions of this section shall equal or exceed existing or future standards as set for the State of Georgia. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Grass seed shall be delivered to the job site in sealed containers with Georgia Department of Agriculture tags attached indicating the seed grower's compliance with the Department's quality control program. 
(b) Trees shall be species of an average mature spread or crown greater than fifteen (15) feet and trunk(s) which can be maintained in a clean condition with over seven (7) feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread or crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the minimum fifteen (15) foot crown spread. Trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in overall height immediately upon planting. 
Trees of species providing roots known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than twelve (12) feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely encased within a container for which the minimum interior dimensions shall be five (5) feet deep in compliance with the construction requirements of the City of Kingsland Engineering Department. 
(c) Shrubs and Hedges - Shrubs shall be a good quality and in keeping with the architecture and landscaping. Hedges shall be of non-deciduous species and planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screening within a maximum of two (2) years after planting. 
(d) Vines - Vines shall be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified. 
(e) Ground Covers - Ground covers used in lieu of grass shall be placed in such in such a manner as to present a finished appearance. 
(f) Lawn Grass - Grass shall be species normally grown as permanent lawn in the City of Kingsland. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion and providing that in areas where other than solid sod is used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for early coverage with protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
(4) Landscaping Adjacent to Public Rights-of-Ways, Including Streets and Walks - The Owner, tenant and/or agent, of an off-street parking or other vehicular use area shall landscape between such area and any adjacent public street, walk or right-of-way as provided below. Landscaping is not required if the area is entirely screened from the right-of-way by an intervening building or structure. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Director of Community Planning and Development, this landscaping shall be installed as follows: 
(a) A landscaped strip at least five (5) feet wide. 
(b) One (1) tree planted within each fifty (50) lineal feet or fraction thereof in a planting area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet with the minimum dimension of at least five (5) feet. 
(c) A hedge, wall or other durable landscape screen at least two (2) feet six (6) inches in height. 
(d) If the durable screen is of non-living material, one (1) scrub or vine shall be planted abutting the screen for each ten (10) feet but not necessarily evenly spaced ten (10) feet apart. Such shrubs or vines shall be planted along the street side of the screen or of sufficient height at the time of planting to be readily visible over the top of the screen. 
(e) The remainder of the landscaped areas shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material. 
(f) All other ground between right-of-way and off-street parking or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. 
(5) Perimeter Landscaping Adjacent to Abutting Properties - The owner, his tenant and/or agent, of an off-street parking at other vehicular use area shall landscape between such area and the abutting property as provided below. Landscaping is not required if the area is entirely screened from the abutting property by an intervening building or structure. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Director of Community Planning and Development, this landscaping shall be installed as follows: 
(a) A wall, hedge, or other durable landscape screen at least six (6) feet in height between the common lot line and the off-street parking or other vehicular use area. 
(b) Live screening materials shall be planted in a strip not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(c) Perimeter landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by the use of curbing or wheel stops. 
(d) Where the abutting property is zoned or used for nonresidential purposes, only the tree provision with its planting area as prescribed in this subsection shall apply to the rear and sides; but all perimeter requirements shall apply to the front setback area. 
(e) If the property contains both parking and other vehicular use areas, the two areas may be separated to determine the landscaping required by this subsection for the other vehicular use area by multiplying the total number of parking spaces by 400 and subtracting the resulting figure. 
(f) Each separate landscaped area shall be a minimum of fifty (50) square feet with a minimum dimension of five (5) feet and shall include at least one (1) tree. The remaining area shall be adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material. 
(g) There shall not be less than one (1) tree for each one hundred (100) square feet of the interior landscaped area or fraction thereof. 
(h) In areas zoned for industrial use, the requirements shall be reduced by 50% unless greater requirements are imposed for such industrial districts. 
(i) All planting areas except those abutting the perimeter of a parking lot or area, shall be raised and curbed. 
140.3. Exception : If the application of this subsection will seriously limit the function of the area, the interior landscaping may be located near the perimeter adjacent to a building on the site. Such required interior landscaping which is relocated shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping required. The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaping area when said area is at least three and one-half (3½) feet in width for each abutting parking space and protected by wheelstops or curbing. Two (2) feet of the landscaped area may be part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(1) Sign Distance for Landscaping Adjacent to Public Rights-of-Way and Points of Access - No landscaping, tree, fence, wall, or similar item shall be maintained in the vicinity of any corner, street, intersection or accessory intersecting a public right-of-way that the Director of Community Planning and Development of the City of Kingsland, or his designee, determines is an obstruction to visibility, extends into sight lines, or is a traffic hazard. 
(2) Existing Plant Material - The Director of Community Planning and Development, or his designee, may adjust the application of the above standards, in part or in whole, to allow credit for healthy plant material on a site prior to its development if, in his opinion, such an adjustment is consistent with the intent of this section. 
140.4. Other Applicable Regulations : The provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to other applicable regulations where such regulations are more restrictive and not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
140.5. Preserving Existing Landscaping During Development 
Importance of Preservation. 
Preserving the existing landscaping on property benefits the developer, the resident and public. It saves the developer money if he can use existing landscaping to satisfy the landscaping requirements of the Ordinance. The resident benefits because full-grown plant materials are present on the site from the first time the property is used. The general public benefits from existing landscaping because it enhances their view of the property, controls temperature and shades nearby streets and provides other benefits. 
140.6. Mechanism for Retaining Existing Landscaping, Vegetation and Trees. The use of existing landscaping can be encouraged through ordinance provisions. One approach is to recommend preservation where possible, another is to require some or all of the existing landscaping to be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of the Ordinances. Since existing landscaping will probably not be distributed exactly as specified in the Ordinance, some evaluation on the part of the public agency may be necessary to determine whether existing materials will be adequate. 
140.6.1. Preservation of Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown to the preservation of all natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historical and similar community assets, which if preserved will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
140.6.2. Existing Trees. Existing trees over five (5) inches in diameter for hardwood and eight (8) inches in diameter for softwood, measured four (4) feet above the base of the trunk, shall be retained whenever possible. 
140.6.3. Parking Lot Landscaping. Where possible, existing trees and shrubs should be preserved and incorporated into the landscaping designs. 
140.6.4. Planned Unit Development. Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures, and improvements which are to be constructed in common open space areas must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common open space, having regard to its topography and character. Minimum requirement of Planned Unit Development as specified in the PUD Regulations areas shall be developed for recreation purposes; such recreation land may be part of land designated as common open space. 
140.6.5. Permit Existing Materials to Satisfy Landscaping Requirements. 
Existing Plant Material: In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in part or in whole, for purposes of off-street parking or other vehicular use areas, the Building and Zoning Department may adjust the application of the above mentioned standards to allow credit for such plant material if, in its opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this section. 
140.6.6. Existing Plant Material. Where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to development and provision is made to preserve same permanently, credit may be given for such natural growth areas against the requirements of this Ordinance to the following extent: 
1. Such areas must be reasonably distributed throughout the developed area in a manner so as to preserve the general intent and purpose of this Ordinance; and 
2. Where such areas are located adjacent to the periphery of the developed area credit for same shall be limited to that which would be required for the first 100 feet parallel to, and immediately adjoining, such periphery. 
140.6.7. Existing Landscape Material. Existing landscape material shall be shown on the required plan, and any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy these requirements in whole or in part when, in the opinion of the public approval authority, such material meets the requirements and achieves the objectives of this article. 
140.7 Site Plan Review. Sometimes approval of a site or landscaping plan is required before existing landscaping can be disturbed. 
140.7.1. Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities. 
General. Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees as herein defined, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. 
140.7.2. Natural Vegetation. Vegetation shall not be removed unless the site plan and the plan for vegetation clearing is approved by the Planning Commission for conditional uses or Director of Community Planning and Development for permitted uses subject to all the provisions of this Ordinance. 
140.8. Tree Removal and Conservation of Vegetation. 
140.8.1. General Standards for Tree Removal and Conservation of Vegetation. 
All subdivisions shall be planned, designed, construed and maintained so that: 
1. Existing healthy trees and native vegetation on the site are preserved to the maximum extent feasible and are protected by adequate means during construction; 
2. Existing native vegetation is not disturbed, injured or removed prior to site development, except to the extent necessary for the preparation of a tentative map; 
3. Following construction, vegetation suitable to the site is planted in conformance with an approved Vegetation Preservation and Protection Plan; 
4. Existing trees are preserved within any right-of-way when such trees are suitably located, healthy, and when approved grading allows; 
5. No slash, dead trees, or up-rooted stumps remain after development; 
6. Appurtenances, such as television antennas, signs and street lights are not attached to trees; and 
7. Any topsoil removed from building sites, parking areas, driveways and other locations is temporarily stored for future use in accordance with the requirements of the City of Kingsland. 
140.8.2. Vegetation Preservation and Protection Plan. 
1. The applicant shall submit as part of the Information Report an accurate survey identifying tree coverage in the proposed subdivision in terms of type, weakness, maturity, potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density and spacing. 
2. The applicant shall submit, as part of the Information Report, a Vegetation Preservation and Protection Plan that shows those trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and locations of trees and other vegetation that are to be planted, and the measures to be taken to satisfy the standards stated in Landscaping Ordinance. 
3. The survey and plan required by Section 140.7 of the Landscaping Ordinance may be combined, where appropriate, with the reports and plans required in the Land Development Ordinance. 
4. On undeveloped land (where building permits have not been issued or subdivisions approved), it is forbidden to destroy more than 25% of the trees on any one parcel of real estate within a five-year period. A site plan must be reviewed by the Director of Community Planning and Development before development can proceed. The developer must specify the location of existing trees of a certain size, indicating those which will remain and those which will be removed. All changes in grade must be indicated. Provisions for protecting trees during development must be specified. The builder is required "to erect suitable protective barriers around all trees specified to be maintained and shall not allow storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill be placed in this area except as may be necessary for a reasonable time if no other storage space is available". The Director of Community Planning and Development shall assure that trees in lawns or paving areas are retained. If the site plan is disapproved, the report must be in writing. 
140.9. Determination of a Tree Worthy of Preservation. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a tree shall be deemed worthy of preservation if it can be reasonably determined by the Director of Community Planning and Development to have a remaining life space equal to or greater than that of the structures proposed in the site plan or subdivision plat or which is unique by reason of size, age, or some other outstanding quality, such as rarity or status as a landmark or species specimen. 
When tree removal is occasioned by any development or land use requiring the submission of a site plan, or subdivision plan, the said plan shall, upon approval by the Director of Community Planning and Development, constitute a tree removal permit. 
140.10 Review of Application. 
140.10.1. Upon receipt of the permit application, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall visit and examine the site. If he/she determines that the plan will destroy no more trees than reasonably necessary to achieve the proposed development, he/she shall approve it. 
140.10.2. If the Director of Community Planning and Development determines that the plan will destroy more trees than reasonably necessary to achieve the proposed development, he/she shall cause it to be modified sufficiently to bring it within the requirements of this part. Prior to modification of any proposed tree preservation plan, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall visit and examine the site. 
140.10.3. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall act upon the permit application within thirty (30) days after receipt. Failure to act upon it within such time shall constitute approval. 
140.11. Standards for Review. Prior to modifying or rejecting the proposed limits of clearing in any tree preservation plan, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall consider the following factors: 
140.11.1. The extent to which the actual or intended use of the property, in accordance with the regulations of the zoning district in which the property lies, requires cutting down or destruction of trees. 
140.11.2. The hardship to the applicant which will result from a modification or denial of the requested permit. 
140.11.3. The desirability of preserving any tree by reason of its size, age, or some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or status as a landmark or species specimen. 
140.11.4. The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water runoff and other environmental degradation due to removal of the trees. 
140.11.5. The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas. 
140.11.6. The need for visual screening in transitional zones, or relief from glare, blight, commercial, industrial ugliness or any other affront to the visual sense in any part of the City. 
140.11.7. The effect that changes in the natural grade will have on the trees to be preserved. 
140.11.8. Earthmoving and Defoliation: A permit shall be required for earthmoving, grading defoliation of property other than for the construction of a private road or drive, or single-family homesite. The Director of Community Planning and Development may withhold issuance of a permit for grading, bulldozing defoliation or the destruction of trees where in his opinion the application: 
1) May cause a needless, wasteful or purposeless destruction of trees, and 
2) Does not provide for sufficient or timely replanting to compensate, as much as reasonably possible, for the removal of grass, foliage or trees. 
Application shall be reviewed and approved or denied within thirty (30) days of submittal, otherwise such applications shall be considered approved by the Director of Community Planning and Development. In the event an application is denied the reasons therefore shall be reported, in writing, to the applicant. 
140.12. Public Nuisance. Any tree or shrub, or parts thereof growing on public or private property which interferes with or endangers the use of public street or other public place within the incorporated area of the City that in the opinion of the City Council endangers the life, health, safety of property of the public, shall be declared a public nuisance. The owner shall be notified in writing or by publication in a local newspaper of the existence of the nuisance and given reasonable time for its correction or removal. 
If not corrected or removed within the time allotted, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost shall be assessed to the owner. 
Where a site has been stripped of its vegetation in violation of this section, or where no replanting has occurred as called for in the specifications of an approved site plan, the Director of Community Planning and Development may require the planting [of] grass, trees or foliage on the entire property. In each event, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall give written notice to the owner of the property specifying the type and amount of replanting and providing a reasonable period of time for its accomplishment. 
Grading of property which results in greatly increased water run-off, siltation, erosion, and/or unsightly and objectionable appearance and which is wholly incompatible to surrounding properties shall constitute a public nuisance in violation of this resolution, unless a replanting schedule has previously been accepted by the City. 
140.13. Destruction of Natural Ground Cover. No person, except pursuant to a written order of the fire chief shall denude and destroy the natural cover of any water shed, except for the immediate use and occupation of the property so denuded in accordance with and subject to all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and the Building Code. 
1) A provision for an inventory of the trees prior to commencement of building; 
2) A prohibition against butting or filling around the base of certain trees more than so many inches high or deep; 
3) A requirement that damage to a tree shall be reported so that it can be treated according to City specifications; 
4) A prohibition against the storage of oil, gas, chemicals, or other construction material around certain trees; 
5) A requirement that drains be installed according to City specification to divert excess water from trees to be saved; 
6) A prohibition against the attachment of signs or wires to the trees to be saved. 
The specifics of such requirements will, of course, vary highly depending upon the topography and the type of trees indigenous to the area. 
140.14. Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. Except as specified by the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance, existing trees of negotiation shall not be removed, destroyed or damaged unless approved by the Director of Community Planning and Development. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall issue permit for removal of existing trees negotiation before trees or vegetation are removed. 
140.15. Tree Protection. 
140.15.1. During construction protective barriers shall be placed around the trunks of all trees to be retained on the site to prevent the destruction or damaging of the trees. 
140.15.2. If at all practical, underground utility lines, curbs and other above-grade structures should be routed around existing trees to the outside of the drip line of the tree. In the event that this is not feasible, a tunnel made by a power driven soil auger may be placed under the tree for installation of utility lines, or a trench passing by the side of the tree may be used for construction of curbing or to accommodate the installation of utility lines. If a trench is used, care should be taken that as few roots as possible are cut, that the cuts are made cleanly and that the root ends are painted with a wound dressing of asphalt base paint and immediately covered with soil. 
140.15.3. No wires or utility service attachments, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree. 
140.15.4. Subsequent to construction or the satisfactory stabilizing of a tree, all protective devices shall be removed. The owner of the project on which the tree is located, the applicant for a tree permit or the individual performing physical moving of a tree shall be fully liable and responsible for removal of the device. 
140.15.5. All trees transplanted pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained alive and healthy in the site of transplantal for a period of six months. Any of such trees which die within such six (6) months shall be replaced by the applicant. The Building Department shall retain jurisdiction to insure compliance with this section. 
140.16. Plant Material Protection Methods. During the construction period, the developer shall abide by the following plant material protection methods: 
140.16.1. There shall be no excavation on the site before the owner's engineer or his duly appointed representative has approved the location of the stake-out of the drives, parking sites, and building sites. No storage of materials shall be permitted except in drives, parking areas, or building sites. Heavy equipment shall be limited to the actual area that drives and buildings will occupy. No vehicles of any kind shall pass over areas designed as greenbelt areas on the drawings. 
140.16.2. The contractor shall be fully responsible for any damage caused to existing trees or other vegetation. He shall carry the responsibility both for his own men and for all subcontractors from the first day of construction until the notice of completion is filed. 
140.16.3. The contractor shall provide appropriate fencing around all trees within ten (10) feet of construction. Where possible such rending shall be at least five (5) feet from the tree trunk. 
140.16.4. All pedestrian traffic shall be limited to the actual construction site. There shall be no foot traffic over areas classified as greenbelt and marked on the plans as such (common area on condominiums, other than streets, parking bays, etc.) 
140.16.5. There shall be no dumping of chemicals of any kind on soil or in places where chemicals may find their way into a drainage channel. This shall include herbicides used under paving. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall designate areas where stockpiling of soil material may take place. No surplus soil shall be piled against tree trunks. 
140.16.6. All removal of tree branches shall be done in accordance with the best tree surgery methods. All wounds shall be sealed with tree seal. Debris shall be removed from the site. 
140.16.7. In areas where structures, such as wood decks, project over existing root areas, there shall be hose bibs provided within reasonable distance or there shall be a permanent watering system installed. 
140.16.8. In areas where tree trunks project through a deck or roof structure, adequate allowance for the expansion of the trunk shall be made. 
140.16.9. No fires which would damage existing trees or vegetation of any kind will be permitted on the property. 
140.16.10. All trees designated to be removed shall be filled in such a manner that in the process of removal no other trees or shrubs designated to remain will be damaged. The contractor shall designate to the Director of Community Planning and Development or his duly appointed representative how he intends to fell such trees. When it is impossible to fell a tree without damage to other trees, the contractor shall remove the tree in sections by roping each section. 
140.16.11. At the start of the work, the owner's engineer shall delineate the property lines. The contractor shall not trespass with vehicles or pedestrian traffic on the adjacent properties. Special care shall be taken in the removal of tree trunks and roots that are located close to trees on neighboring property. Branches that originate from trees on the adjacent property but overhang the project site shall be removed only with permission of the State Forester. 
140.16.12. Boulders uncovered in the grading or excavation operation may be relocated in greenbelt areas where they conform with the native surroundings. The owner or his architect shall be placed under the direct supervision of the owner or his duly appointed representative and shall be settled in the ground so that it will be: 
1) Safe and will not move. 
2) Achieve as natural an appearance as possible. 
140.16.13. Tree trunks shall not be used as sign posts, supports for temporary power or similar purposes. There shall be no nailing into tree trunks and trees shall not be used to brace forms of any kind. 
140.16.14. In the cases where the contractor is required by the plans and specifications to come within a six foot distance of a tree to be saved, the owner assumes the responsibility for such trees. The contractor's responsibility is to adhere to the tree protection specifications, and to exercise particular care. If by no fault of the contractor, the tree declines or dies, the contractor shall not be held responsible for it. 
140.16.15. Reforestation Program Requirement. The number of trees required on any development area shall be determined by using the ratio of one (1) tree for each one-tenth ( 1/10 th ) acre. 
140.16.16. Credits for Preserving Existing Trees. Credit may be received on the reforestation requirement by preserving existing trees, except on the perimeter tree planting requirements unless the location of the preserved tree is within the perimeter area. 
Preserved trees deemed eligible for credit shall be healthy and of such quality as acceptable to the Director of Community Planning and Development. In order to maintain the tree, fifty (50) percent of the ground area under and within the drip line of the tree shall be preserved from the tree trunk out to the edge of the drip line and shall be maintained in either vegetative landscape material or previous surface cover except when the Director of Community Planning and Development determines that lesser areas and other ground cover treatment will provide sufficient nourishment for the continued growth of the preserved tree. 
140.16.16.1. Each new tree must be planted in a landscape area of not less than twenty-five (25) square feet. To insure the proper development of the tree's crown, no tree counted as credit shall be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet on center. Each tree planted for credit in compliance with this Ordinance shall be given credit against the landscape area requirements of this Ordinance according to the following schedule: 

 
The above list of trees shall not be construed as being all-inclusive, but shall be considered as representative. Trees not named above may be permitted and shall be included in the category which contains trees most similar in size at maturity. 
140.16.16.2. Trees which are preserved shall receive credit against the landscape area requirements according to the following schedule: 

 
Caliber - Average diameter of the tree measured four (4) feet above the ground level. 
These credits shall apply where the preserved tree is in a planting area whose least dimension is one-half (½) the radius of the crown spread of the tree measured from the trunk center and where no grade changes within the landscape area are anticipated. In no case shall this least dimension be less than two and one-half (2½) feet. The ground surface within such preserved planting areas shall be maintained in a vegetative cover. Credit allowed for preserved trees shall be in addition to the actual square footage of planting area within which the tree is located. 
Conditions for relocation and replacement. As a condition to the granting of a tree removal permit, the applicant will be required, where practical, to relocate, remove or replace the trees on the site as follows: 
140.16.16.3. Relocation. 
(1) All trees on the site which are to be removed may be relocated on the site within the building area or the yard area. 
(2) If it is impractical to relocate a tree which must be removed and replanted, it may be removed and replanted on city-owned property at the city's expense, and at the City's option. 
(3) If it is impractical to relocate and replant such trees to be removed either on the site or off the site, because of age, type or size, the tree may be destroyed or the applicant may be required to redesign the project to preserve the tree. 
(4) In the event that a tree is permitted to be destroyed, an applicant may be required to replace the tree with new trees of comparable size, nature and beauty, as determined by the Board. In no instance, however, shall the replacement tree be less than fifteen (15) feet in height and three (3) inches in diameter. 
ARTICLE XV. - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 150. - Platting authority. 
The Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority. 
Sec. 151. - Pre-application review. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the jurisdiction of the Commission is proposed, the prospective developer should consult early and informally with the Director of Community Planning and Development for advice and assistance. The prospective developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall return within fifteen (15) days the submitted sketch to the prospective developer and shall inform the prospective developer where the plans do not comply with the regulations set forth in the Ordinance. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review and no formal application shall be required. 
Sec. 152. - Procedure for preliminary plat approval. 
Prior to the cutting or grading of any street or the making of any street improvements or the installation of utilities, the prospective developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a Preliminary Plat of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following: 
152.1. Application for Preliminary Plat. Following the pre-application review of a proposed subdivision, the prospective developer shall submit to the Director of Community Planning and Development, at least twenty-six (26) days prior to the next regular meeting of the Commission, a letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in Section 153 herein. 
152.1.1. Preliminary Plat Filing Fees. Preliminary Plats, when submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 152.1., shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from the following schedule: 
PRELIMINARY PLAT: 
1-10 Lots (per lot) ..... $25.00 
11-30 Lot ..... $260.00 
plus $10.00 for each lot over 11 
31 or more lots ..... $454.00 
plus $4.00 for each lot over 31 
152.2. Review of Preliminary Plat. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this Ordinance and report his findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat. 
152.2.1. Preliminary Approval. Following the hearing of the Preliminary Plat and other related material the Commission may express preliminary approval noting the conditions of such approval on three copies of the Preliminary Plat with one copy being returned to the prospective developer, one copy to the office of the Building Inspector for the Council and one copy to be added to the records of the Commission. Approval of a Preliminary Plat does not constitute approval of a Final Plat; it indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plat. It is the subdivider's decision if or not to submit the three copies of the Preliminary Plat. Because the plat is being submitted in digital format the GIS Department within the City of Kingsland can furnish these copies, provided the digital data is correct and available. 
152.2.2. Expiration Time. Preliminary approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months from the date of the preliminary approval unless final plat approval has been given on at least one lot of the development. 
152.2.3. Disapproval. Following the hearing of the Preliminary Plat and other related material, the Commission may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health, and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans of the Commission which required the disapproval of the Preliminary Plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be made on two copies of the Preliminary Plat with one copy being added to the records of the Commission. The applicant may reapply for Preliminary Plat approval in accordance with Section 152.1. herein. 
152.2.4. Automatic Approval. Failure of the Commission to act on the Preliminary Plat within thirty (30) days after submission thereof, without due cause, shall be deemed to be approval of the Plat and a Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall be issued by the Commission on demand, provided, however, that the prospective developer may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 153. - Preliminary plat specification. 
153.1. Scale. The Preliminary Plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 200 feet to one inch. 
153.2. Sheet Size. Sheet size shall not be smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches or larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on a sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of a reduced scale. All plats shall be submitted in digital format in accordance with the "CAD Layering Specifications for Land Plats Submitted within the City of Kingsland, Georgia", 
153.3 CAD LAYERING SPECIFICATIONS - Digital Drawing Specifications for Subdivision Plats Submitted within the City of Kingsland - Camden County, Georgia 
153.3.1 Overview. The City of Kingsland GIS Department has prepared a set of CAD standards for the digital submittal of subdivision plat drawings within the city. The GIS Department will work with developers within the city and the county to institute these standards. The purpose of defining these standards is to allow the city when applicable to import the plat data directly into their geographic information system (GIS). Adherence to the standards will allow for quicker plat approval and a quicker update of the county's cadastral data files, saving tax dollars while improving service. 
In general, a GIS is a geographic database whose graphic elements are directly tied to non-graphic tabular database records. The graphics and databases are so intrinsically tied that changing the graphics alters the database records, while altering the database may alter the graphic display. There are significant differences between the county's GIS and data stored in a CAD-generated drawing file. Certain data standards must be met to ensure that data prepared with a standard CAD package such as AutoCAD can be quickly and easily converted into the county's GIS data format. 
Following is the 'reserved layer' list that specifies the type of data to be drawn on each of the reserved layers: name, line type, color, width, font and text size specifications for any layers to be used in the description and filing of a subdivision plat within the City of Kingsland, GA. In addition to the layering specifications, some general specifications apply, as shown below. 
153.3.2 General Specifications 
a) All plats submitted within Kingsland will use State Plane Coordinates or UTM (NAD 83). This is the preferred projection; however, it is optional at this time. 
b) All submitted drawings will be submitted in both DWG and DXF formats. 
c) All submitted DXF files will provide attribute data as an insertion block on layer 9. 
d) No other data will be drawn on the reserved layer except those specified. 
e) Unspecified data may be added to the drawing file placed on a layer not specified for other use. 
f) No symbology, block, or text may be drawn on a reserved layer except those line, block, and text elements specified below. 
g) Closure is critical for converting the CAD data into a GIS format. 
h) All text elements will be inserted as 'center' unless otherwise specified. In addition, each text element should be located near the center of the feature that it represents; for example, lot number should be located near the center of the lot. 
i) Any bearing/distance table generated should be labeled with the Layer number and it's description. For example: Layer 10-Subdivision Distance Table 
153.3.3 Methods to submit the digital data 
a) Data can be submitted on a 3.5 Floppy disk if it can fit. This file can be compressed as a WinZip file with a .zip extension. 
b) Data can be submitted on an Iomega 100MB Zip Disk. 
c) Data can be submitted on a CD-ROM 
d) Or data can be submitted electronically via email. Prior to sending this file via email though, verbal contact must be made with Ken Kessler, GIS Manager at (912)729-8279. The email address will be kkessler@kingslandgeorgia.com. 
153.3.4 Layer Descriptions 
1 Subdivision Boundary (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
This line forms the legal limits or the outer boundary of the entire subdivision plat. It forms a closed polygon. This layer may be composed of many lines, but it should result in one and only one closed polygon for each subdivision. 
1 Subdivision Name (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
This is a text string with an insertion point located any where within the outer boundary of the subdivision (or line work on layer 1). 

Brentwood estates 
2 Block Boundary (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 7 (White) 
This line or set of lines creates the outer boundary of each block within a subdivision. Block boundaries are generally formed by a combination of right-of-way lines and the subdivision boundary. A block boundary may be further subdivided into many lots or it may not be further subdivided at all, as in the case of a common area such as a large street island or small park. It is also likely that the block boundary lines will be a set of lines that are duplicated on other drawing layers. These will usually be composed of right-of-way lines that bound a block. In this instance, this type of block boundary line will only be drawn if block numbering will be used as a part of the subdivision-block-lot legal description. (That is, the lots are described as lot 17 of block 2). If block numbering will not be used within the subdivision (and there are no common areas that will require a block designation), this layer is to be left blank. 
2 Block Number (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 7 (White) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
The block number should appear once for every block boundary polygon. If there are no blocks within the subdivision, this layer should be left blank. 
Block number text string 
3 Lot Boundary (Line or Pline) 
Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 1 (Red) 
Lines to be entered on this layer are those that separate one lot from an adjacent lot within the same subdivision, but are not a block boundary or a right-of-way line. These internal lot boundaries may be thought of as side-lot-lines and back-lot-lines. 
3 Lot Number (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 1 (Red) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
The lot number should appear once for every lot within the subdivision. The lot number should be a text string with an insertion point within the outer boundary of the lot it identifies. 
Lot number text string 
4 ROW Line (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 3 (Green) 
A line used to divide the privately held property from land to be publicly held, used, and maintained as public right-of-way. The endpoints of any right-of-way segment should be snapped to the end points of the following: lot boundary segments; other right-of-way line endpoints; or the subdivision lot boundary. 
4 ROW Text or Street Name (Text String) 
Street names should be input on the Street Centerline (Layer 15). 
Row text 
5 Public Common Area (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 3 (Green) 
A line which delineates an area of land that is to be platted and dedicated as a common public area, such as a street island or median strip that will most likely be included as right-of-way, and is not intended to have a lot and block legal description. This type of area may also be referred to as a 'tract'. 
5 Public Common Area ID (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 3 (Green) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
If the common area will contain a tract number designation, that number should be included on this layer. 
Public common area ID 
6 Private Common Area or Private Tract (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 2 (Yellow) 
A line, which delineates an area of land, that may be platted and dedicated as a common publicly held area (such as a street island, median or park space) that will be owned and maintained by a homeowner's association. This type of area may also be known as a 'tract'. 
6 Private Common Area ID (Text String) 
Front: Unspecified 
Color: 2 (Yellow) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
If such an area of land is to have a tract number or description other than a lot and block number, that description should be entered on this layer. 
Private common area ID 
7 Easements (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Unspecified 
Width: 0.0 
Color: Unspecified 
Any easement information should be placed on this layer. 
7 Easement Text (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: Unspecified 
Text Height: Unspecified 
All descriptive text and easement dimensions should be placed on this layer. 
8 Water Bodies (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
This line delineates the boundaries of the bodies of water that exist within the area of platted tract of land. Bodies of water to be included in this layer are lakes, rivers, creeks etc. 
8 Water Bodies Text (Text String) 
Front: Unspecified 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
This specifies the type of water body with its formal name. 
Water Bodies Text 
9 Title Block All information within the Title Block will be stored as a block. The block is named TITLBLK.DWG. This block will be inserted at a point that corresponds to the lower left corner of the drawing. The title block requires an area roughly 500' × 500' (five hundred feet by five hundred feet) of real space (space in state plane coordinates). 

 

Title Block Data Input Format 
Subdivision Name A text field containing the legal name of the subdivision. 
City A text field containing the city in which the plat has been submitted. 
County A text field containing the county name. The default string is 'Camden'. 
Submittal Date A text field containing the date the plat was submitted to the city or county for consideration. 
Name/Address of Owner This is the name and address of owner of record and of sub-divider. 
Projection Type This is the projection type of the digital plat. The projection will be either UTM Zone 17 or Stateplane Zone 3651-both using Datum North American Datum 83 (NAD83) 
Prepared by A text field containing the name of the company that prepared the subdivision drawing. 
Drawing/File number This is the plat preparer's internal drawing number. Any response is valid. 
GMD: Georgia Militia District. 
Number of Lots This value records the number of legal lots within the plat, excluding right-of-way and any publicly held or privately held common areas such as street median strips or green space maintained by a homeowner's association. 
Number of Blocks This field records the number of legal blocks within the subdivision if applicable. 
Number of Private Commons This field records the number of privately held common areas, such as green space that will be privately held and maintained by a neighborhood association. 
Number of Public Commons This field records the number of publicly held common areas, such as median strips, that will become part of the public right-of-way and maintained by the appropriate city or county. 
Total Acreage This is the total acreage for the plat or subdivision. 
Building Restrictions Any building restrictions on the front, rear, and side of the lot in a subdivision. 
Current Zoning The current zoning of the plat. 
Easements Any easements, drainage, and utilities that might exist around the property. 
Wetland Type This is the wetland type existing on the property. This data is available through the FEMA FIRM. 
"NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING" This will only be noted in the title block when the plat is in its preliminary stages. It will be omitted when the plat is for final review and submittal. 
Subdivision (Dimension) Annotation 
10 Subdivision Distance (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 7 (White) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any descriptive text that describes the bearing and distance of a line element around the plat perimeter to the nearest 1/10 -foot, 1/100 if possible (preferred method). (Layer 1). Please note that although the bearings aren't shown, they are expected in this layer as well. If desired, a table can be generated for the bearings and distances corresponding to specific lines for easier management of space, but the lines must be shown. The error should not exceed 1/5000 . 
Subdivision distance 
11 Lot Line Distance/Acreage (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 7 (White) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any descriptive text that describes the bearing and distance of a line element defining an internal lot line (see layer 3). Please note that although the bearings aren't shown, they are expected in this layer as well. If desired, a table can be generated for the bearings and distances corresponding to specific lines for easier management of space, but the lines must be shown. Acreage for the lots should be shown on this layer and centered in each lot. 
Lot line distance 
12 Row Line Distance (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 7 (White) 
Text Height: unspecified 
Any descriptive text that describes the bearing and distance of a line element defining a right-of-way line (see layer 4). If desired, a table can be generated for the bearings and distances corresponding to specific lines for easier management of space, but the lines must be shown on layer 4. 
13 House Numbers (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 1(Red) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
This layer will be used for the final plat approval only. This is the number of the address assigned to each of the lots. 
House numbers 
14 Adjoining Streets/Parcels (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 1(Red) 
The closest land-lot corners and streets shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by bearings and distances. 
14 Adjoining Streets/Parcels (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 1(Red) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
This layer will specify the distance and bearings for the adjacent lot line and streets. A table depicting this information can be used here. 
Adjoining streets 
Proposed Improvements 
15 Street Centerlines 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
This line delineates the centerline of the street within subdivision plat. 
15 Street Annotation (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: 5 (Blue) 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any street names, dimensions, and bearings associated with the centerline should be entered on this layer. Text is to be centered within the right-of-way. 
16 Pavement Edges (if available) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: Unspecified 
The pavement edges represent actual road edges such as curbs. 
Survey Control Points 
Insert: Point 
Color: Unspecified 
Any surveyed, centimeter-accurate GPS control points should be placed on this layer. NAD83 should be used for the horizontal datum and NAVD88 for the vertical datum. 
20 Survey Control Points Text (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: Unspecified 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any descriptive text associated with survey control points should be placed on this layer. 
21 Floodplains (or Drainage)-(Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: Unspecified 
If floodplain information is available it should be placed on this layer. This information will only be used for internal analysis, not as a substitute for official FEMA maps. A floodplain line table can be used to replace the line data if desired provided that an X, Y starting point expressed in the same units as the layers is given. 
21 Floodplain Text (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: Unspecified 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any descriptive floodplain text should be placed on this layer. 
22 Wetlands (Line or Pline) 
Line Type: Continuous 
Width: 0.0 
Color: Unspecified 
If wetlands exist in the subdivision, the information should be placed on this layer. This information will only be used for internal analysis, not as a substitute for official NWI maps. A wetland line table can be used to replace the line data if desired provided that an X, Y starting point expressed in the same units as the projection type is given. 
22 Wetland Text (Text String) 
Font: Unspecified 
Color: Unspecified 
Text Height: Unspecified 
Any descriptive wetland text should be placed on this layer. 
>23 Other Features 
Layers 23-39 are reserved for future uses. Any extra information from the digital drawing can be input on these layers as long as it is documented. 
>40 Proposed Utilities 
None of the utility information will be imported by the city immediately; however, this series of utility information may be very useful for the identification and location of the underground infrastructure. Layers 40 and above are therefore being reserved for future definition. 
153.4. Ground Elevations. The Preliminary Plat shall show elevations based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, with a contour interval of five (5) feet (or less if determined by the Commission). 
The City of Kingsland also reserves the right to require ground elevation on any plat of one lot or more submitted for approval. 
153.5. Information to be Provided on Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following information: 
a. Name and address of owner of record and/or prospective developer. 
b. Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
c. North point and graphic scale and date. 
d. Vicinity map showing location in relation to obvious geographic locations. 
e. Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distance. 
f. Names of owners of record of adjoining land with its approximate acreage. 
g. Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract, including the size and width of each. 
h. Proposed layout including streets, alleys and easements with both dimensions and proposed street names; lot lines with approximate dimensions; and any land to be used for purpose other than single-family dwelling. 
i. Block letters lot size and numbers. 
j. Provisions for water supply, sewage and drainage. 
k. Minimum building setback lines. 
l. Such typical street cross-sections and center line profile as may be required. 
m. Location of streams, lakes, and swamps and land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding. 
n. Existing zoning district classification of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining properties. 
o. Inscription stating "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING". 
153.6. Certificate of Preliminary Approval. A Certificate of Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval having been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Kingsland Planning Commission on _______. This Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire and be null and void on _______. 
  Date         Director of Community Planning and Development 
153.7. Initiation of Installing Physical Improvements. After receiving a Certificate of Preliminary Approval by the Commission, the subdivider may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements prior to submission of the Final Plat, provided the subdivider posts a performance bond with the Treasurer of the Council in an amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and assuring to the Council the actual construction and installation of such improvements within the period of time specified by the Commission and stated in the bond. 
153.8. Guarantee of Improvements/Bonds. 
153.8.1. Performance Bond. 
1. The Planning Commission in its discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond at the time of application for final subdivision approval in an amount estimated by the Planning Commission and City Council as sufficient to secure to the local government the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the uncompleted portion of required improvements. The performance bond shall also secure all lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in these regulations. 
2. Such performance shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Kingsland City Council in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the bond which shall not, in any event, exceed two (2) years from date of final approval. 
3. Such bond shall be approved by the Kingsland City Council as to amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the Kingsland City Council. The Planning Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the Kingsland City Council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. The Kingsland City Council may at any time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
153.8.2. Temporary Improvements. The Applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by Kingsland City Council. Prior to construction of any temporary facilities, a Performance Bond will be required, which bond shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
153.8.3. Costs of Improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at his expense, without reimbursement by the City or any improvement district therein. 
153.8.4. Governmental Units. Governmental units to which these bonds and contract provisions apply may file in lieu of said contractor bond a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act on their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
153.8.5. Failure to Complete Improvement. In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond, the local government may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
153.8.6. Acceptance of Dedication Offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by resolution of the City Council accompanied by the appropriate deed or written easement. The approval by the Planning Commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the local government of any street, easement, or park shown on said plat. The Planning Commission may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
153.8.7. Alternate Improvement Guarantees. If the Kingsland City Council finds that a developer is not able to post a performance bond, the City Council may require the prospective developer to use one of the following improvements guarantee techniques: 
1) Escrow Account The prospective developer shall deposit cash, or collateral readily convertible to cash at face value, either with the City Council or in escrow with a bank. The use of collateral other than cash, and the selection of the bank with which funds are to be deposited, are subject to the approval of the City Council. 
Where an escrow account is to be employed, the prospective developer shall file with the City Council his agreement with the bank guaranteeing the following: 
(a) That the funds in the escrow account are to be held in trust until released by the City Council and may not be used or pledged by the prospective developer as security for any obligation during that period. 
(c) That in case the prospective developer fails to complete the required improvements, the bank shall immediately make the funds in escrow available to the City for the completion of these improvements. 
153.8.8. Property Escrow. The prospective developer may offer as a guarantee land or other property, including corporate stocks or bonds. A qualified real estate appraiser shall establish the value of any real property so used and in so doing, shall take into account the possibility of a decline or rise in the value of the property during the guarantee period. If requested by the prospective developer, the City Council may exchange the property for an amount of money sufficient to complete the required improvements. When property is offered as an improvement guarantee, the prospective developer shall: 
1. Execute an agreement with the escrow agent when it is not the City instructing the agent to release the property to the City in the case of default. The agreement shall be placed on file with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
2. File with the City Council an affidavit affirming that the property to be used as a guarantee is free and clear of any encumbrances or liens at the time it is to be put in escrow. 
3. Execute and file with the City Council an agreement stating that the property to be placed in escrow as an improvement guarantee will not be used for any other purpose, or pledged as a security in any other matter, until it is released by the City Council. 
153.8.9. Sequential Development. Where a subdivision is to be developed in phased portions, the City Council may waive the use of a guarantee on the initial portion, provided that such portion may not contain more than twenty-five (25) lots, or fifty percent (50%) of the total number of lots proposed for the subdivision, whichever is less. The City Council may grant final plat approval to only one portion at a time, with the plat approval to only one succeeding portion being contingent upon completion of all contracted improvements in each preceding portion, and acceptance of those improvements by the City Council. Completion of improvements in the final portion of the subdivision, which must include at least 25 lots or 50 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less, must be guaranteed through the use of one or the other methods detailed herein. 
153.8.10. Letter of Credit. Subject to the approval of the City Council, the subdivider shall provide a letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution or individual. This letter shall be deposited with the City Council and shall certify the following: 
1. That the creditor guarantees funds in an amount equal to the cost, as estimated by the prospective developer and approved by the City Council, of completing all required improvements. 
2. That if the prospective developer fails to complete the specified improvements within the required period, the creditor will pay to the City immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
153.8.11. Other Methods. Any other method of sufficient financial commitment that may be acceptable to the City Council. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 154. - Final plat procedure. 
After the completion of the physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a performance bond the subdivider shall submit to the Commission a Final Plat in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the Final Plat. 
(2)  Ten (10) printed copies and one (1) original of the Final Plat with signed certification and other documents as specified in Section 125. 
(3)  Where Office Approval is applicable, four (4) printed copies and one (1) original as per Section 124.3. 
(4)  Digital submittal of the final plat based on the "CAD Layering Specifications" 
154.1. Final Plat Filing Fee. A final plat filing fee is required for those subdivisions which have filed a preliminary plat and paid the appropriate fee as determined by the schedule included in Section 152.1.1. However, if a preliminary plat is not required as per Section 157, a fee, determined by the schedule included in Section 152.1.1 shall accompany all such final plats submitted in accordance with Article XV (Procedures for Subdivision Plat Approval). 
154.2. Office Approval. The Director of Community Planning and Development may give final approval in the name and on behalf of the Commission provided the final plat is the same as that granted preliminary approval by the Commission and that all conditions specified herein have been met; and shall sign a certificate of approval on all printed drawings with two (2) copies being returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy to the Office of the Building Inspector for the Council, and one (1) copy being added to the records of the Commission. No final plat shall be approved by the Director of Community Planning and Development until the required certifications have been approved by the appropriate approving agents as required in Section 154. 
154.3. Commission Approval. The Commission may give final approval if the Commission had previously required the Final Plat to be presented at a Public Hearing; and require the Director of Community Planning and Development to sign a certificate of approval on all printed drawings with the same distribution of the drawings as described in Section 154. No final Plat shall be approved by the Commission until the required certifications have been approved by the appropriate approving agents as required in Section 154.2. 
154.4. Disapproval. The Commission or Director of Community Planning and Development may find the Final Plat in conflict with the tentatively approved Preliminary Plat or with this Ordinance requiring the disapproval of said plat. The disapproval shall be placed on two (2) copies of the final plat with one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider and one (1) copy being added to the records of the Commission. No certificate of approval shall be given. The Final Plat may be resubmitted within ninety (90) days of disapproval, as a new application for Final Plat approval for hearing after the corrections noted by the Commission are made. 
154.5. City Council Approval. The City Council shall approve all Final Plats and issue a signed certification upon the Final Plat as per Section 155.6. 
154.6. Automatic Approval. Failure of the Commission to act on the Final Plat within thirty (30) days after submission thereof shall be deemed to be approval of the plat and a certificate of Final Approval shall be issued by the Commission on demand, provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Sec. 155. - Final plat specifications. 
155.1. Conformance with Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat shall conform to the conditions of the tentatively approved Preliminary Plat. The final plat will further have an additional layer to include the house numbers designated by the Community Planning and Zoning Director for the City of Kingsland as specified in the "CAD Layering Specifications" 
155.2. Original Tracing Specifications. The Final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on any acceptable tracing material as required by the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Camden County. The scale shall be 100 feet or 50 feet to the inch on a sheet size of not less 18" × 24" and not greater than 24" × 36". If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of a reduced scale. 
155.3. Additional Specifications. The Final Plat shall conform with the Georgia Plat Act and shall contain the following information: 
(1) Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(2) North point and graphic scale and date. 
(3) Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision. 
(4) Names and owners of record of adjoining land with its appropriate acreage. 
(5) Location of streams, lakes, and swamps and land subject to flood as determined from past history of flooding. 
(6) Bearing and distance to permanent points on the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than three) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
(7) Municipal and county lines shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(8) The closest land-lot corner shall be accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles. 
(9) Land-lot and land-district number shall be shown. 
(10) Exact boundary lines of the tract determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) foot and angles to the nearest minute, shall be balanced and closed with an apparent error of closure not to exceed one in five thousand. 
(11) Name of subdivision, exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the new subdivision shall be shown on the plat. 
(12) Street right-of-way lines shall show angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lines of tangents. 
(13) Lot lines shall be shown with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ). 
(14) Lots shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(15) Each lot shall have a house number. 
(16) Location, dimension, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or depicted for the public use shall be shown on the plat. 
(17) Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers, shall be described on the Plat. 
(18) Minimum building front yard setback lines shall be shown. 
(19) The Final Plat shall conform with the 'Georgia Plat Act' and the 'City of Kingsland CAD Layering Specifications'. 
155.4. Surveyor's Certification. A signed certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and stamp shall be placed on the Final Plat as follows: 
"The field data upon which this map is based have a closure precision of one foot in _______ feet and an angular error of _______ per angle point, and was adjusted using the _______ rule. 
This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _______ feet. 
The linear and angular measurements shown on this plat were obtained by using a _______ and _______. 
BY:  _____ Ga. Registered Land Surveyor No. _______" 
155.5. Owner's Certification. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the Final Plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, County of Camden 
The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicated to public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements or parks. 
   Date             Owner's Name"    
155.6. Certificate of Approval by the Council. A signed certification of the Council shall be placed on the Final Plat as follows: 
"We certify that the owner, or his agent, has completed the construction and installation of the streets, drainage, utilities and other improvements in accordance with the laws and specifications of the City of Kingsland, Georgia; or has posted a performance in lieu thereof. 
   Date          Title of Director of Community Planning Development 
Sec. 156. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon the approval of a Final Plat by the Commission, the owner or his agent, shall have the Final Plat recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court prior to the sale of any lot in the subdivision. Upon recording of the approved Final Plat, a copy of any private covenants or deed restrictions shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the Commission. 
Sec. 157. - Subdivisions not exceeding five (5) lots. 
Notwithstanding the provisions stated elsewhere in this Ordinance, the Director of Community Planning and Development is hereby delegated the authority to give preliminary and final approval in the name and on behalf of the Commission to applications for approval of a subdivision not exceeding five (5) lots in size, pending the review and approval of the Director of Public Works and the Municipal Utilities Director and the City Building Inspector, provided no new street is involved; the required certifications have been approved by the appropriate agent; no variances are involved; and all the requirements set forth in this Ordinance are met. Final approval may be given by the Director of Community Planning and Development on a plat that was preliminarily approved by the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , 11-14-2016) 
ARTICLE XVI. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND 

Sec. 160. - General design requirements. 
160.1. Suitability of Land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion, or which is for topographical, geological or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use or for other uses that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
160.2. Name of Subdivision. The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the Commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision. 
160.3. Access. Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
160.4. Conformance to Adopted Major Thoroughfare Plans. All streets and other features of the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Kingsland shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan adopted by the Commission and/or Council. 
160.5. Through Traffic. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
Sec. 161. - General requirements for streets and other rights-of-way. 
161.1. Continuation of Existing Streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
161.2. Connections with Future Subdivisions. Streets shall be reserved at strategic locations to provide for future access to adjoining properties which may be subdivided in the future. Each street connection shall intersect property lines at a ninety (90) degree angle. 
161.3. Street Names. Street names shall require the approval of the Commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing streets. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those existing streets. 
161.4. Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
161.5. Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs, or dead-end streets, shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a property line radius of at least 50 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet. 
161.5.1. Cul-de-sacs with Islands. Cul-de-sacs with islands will have a minimum right-of-way (ROW) diameter of at least one-hundred ten feet (110'), with an outside pavement diameter eighty-five feet (85'). A landscaped island shall be placed in the center of the cul-de-sac measuring no more than twenty-five feet (25') in diameter allowing for a travel lane around the cul-de-sac of no less than thirty feet (30'). 
161.6. Development Along Major Street, Limited Access Highway, or Railroad Right-of-Way. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street, or a railroad right-of-way, the Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planned. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to expressways, freeways, or arterial streets, but only to an accessible street in which case the Commission may require double frontage lots. 
161.7. Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the Commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
161.8. Alleys. The requirements for providing alleys within a subdivision are as follows: 
161.8.1. Alleys shall be provided in multi-family commercial, and industrial districts, except where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street parking, loading and unloading consistent with and adequate for the uses provided. 
161.8.2. Alleys shall not be provided in one and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the Commission of the need for alleys. 
161.8.3. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall provide sufficient radius to permit safe vehicular movements. 
161.8.4. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the Commission. 
161.9. Reserve Strips and Easements. 
161.9.1. Reserve strips controlling the access to streets shall be prohibited except where this control is definitely placed in the hands of the Council under conditions approved by the Commission. The Commission may require access to expressways, freeways, arterial and collector streets by requiring all lots to face and have access to only minor streets. 
161.9.2. Easements having a minimum width of 10 feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as is necessary for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm-water or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the Commission herewith. 
161.10. Accel/Decel Lanes. Accel/decel lanes must be provided when a street empties into an arterial street, highway and/or collector street. The decel lane shall be not less than 200 feet in length where possible, 50 feet of which is to be tapered. The accel lane shall be not less than 50 feet, tapered. Accel/decel lanes are to be approved by the Building Official prior to construction. 
Sec. 162. - Rights-of-way width requirement. 
The minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Freeways and Expressways ..... 150 feet 
(2)  Arterial Streets ..... 100 feet 
(3)  Collector Streets ..... 80 feet 
(4)  Minor Commercial and Industrial Streets ..... 70 feet 
(5)  Minor Residential Streets ..... 60 feet 
(6)  Marginal Access Streets ..... 50 feet 
(7)  Alleys ..... 20 feet 
(8)  Cul-de-sacs ..... 100 feet 
Sec. 163. - Street design requirements. 
163.1. Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible with no street intersection being at any angle of less than 75 degrees. 
163.2. Right-of-Way Radius. The streets right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be at least 20 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the Commission may require a longer radius. 
163.3. Additional Width on Existing Streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way if needed to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in Section 162. 
163.3.1. The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing streets. 
163.3.2. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half (½) of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
Sec. 164. - Design standards for blocks and lots. 
164.1. Design Lengths and Widths. Block lengths and widths shall be determined based on the following requirements: 
164.1.1. Blocks shall not be greater than 2,200 feet nor less than 400 feet in length. 
164.1.2. Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major street, limited-access highways or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impractical in which case the Commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
164.1.3. Blocks shall have pedestrian walkways/sidewalks not less than ten (10) feet wide where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Otherwise, all sidewalks shall be 5 feet in width. 
164.2. Lot Sizes. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements set forth in the zoning districts in which the land to be subdivided is located. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both abutting streets. 
164.3. Building Lines. A building line meeting the front and side yard setback requirements of the zoning district in which the subdivision is located shall be established on all lots. 
164.4. Lots Abutting Public Streets. Each lot shall abut a dedicated public street. 
164.5. Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separations of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery of other disadvantage use. 
Sec. 165. - Modifications of subdivision requirements. 
165.1. Modifications of the provisions set forth in the subdivision regulations may be authorized by the Commission in specific cases when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance; provided only such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical and other exceptional conditions requiring such modifications will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations; provided further that any such modifications granted by the Commission shall be made in writing to the sub-divider and also made a part of the Commission's records and the Plat. 
165.2. Application for any modifications must be filed in writing with necessary supporting documents with the reasons and facts supporting the application. 
ARTICLE XVII. - REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 170. - Monuments. 
Right-of-way and property line monuments shall be placed in each subdivision in accordance with the following: 
170.1. Right-of-Way Monuments. A concrete marker imbedded at least two (2) feet into the ground shall be required at the intersection of the centerline of all street rights-of-way. Such concrete markers shall be at least four (4) inches in diameter. The top surface of such concrete marker shall be level with the surface of the street. 
170.2. Property Line Monuments. An iron pin or concrete marker at least two (2) feet into the ground shall be required at each lot corner and each point where the property line changes direction. Such an iron shall be at least three-quarters (¾) of an inch in diameter. The top surface of such iron pin shall be approximately level with the ground surface. Such concrete marker shall be at least four (4) inches in diameter. The top surface of such concrete marker shall be approximately level with the ground surface. 
Sec. 171. - Special classification of streets for construction. 
All streets shall be classified for construction purposes only as follows: 
171.1. Standard Street. A standard street shall be paved, curbed and guttered in accordance with the specifications required herein, and shall be required in all zoning districts. Right-of-way width requirements shall be in accordance with Section 162 herein. 
Sec. 172. - Additional street design requirements. 
172.1. Grades, Horizontal Curves, Tangents and Sight Distances. The following street design requirements shall be adhered to in addition to other requirements stated herein: 

 
172.2. Vertical Curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in percent of grades for expressways, freeways, arterial and collector streets, and one-half (½) this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet horizontally and one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet vertically may be required by the Commission. 
Sec. 173. - Basic construction requirements for all streets. 
173.1. Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the sub-divider so that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements herein and other specifications of the Council. 
173.2. Storm Drainage. An adequate drainage system based on at least the ten (10) year rainfall frequency, including necessary curb, pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
173.3. Installation of Utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities (water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, or any other underground utilities), and all service connections related thereto, shall be installed completely and proved throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Service connections for sanitary sewer and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
173.4. Slopes and Shoulder Improvements. The minimum ratio for all fill or cut slopes shall be two (2) to one (1) and the minimum width for all shoulders from back edge of the curb, if installed, shall be eight (8) feet. All shoulders shall slope one-half (½) inch to the foot. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
173.5. Accel/Decel Lanes. Accel/decel lanes are to be provided if required under Section 161.10 of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 174. - Roadway surfacing and paving. 
For Standard Streets, the following minimum requirements shall be adhered to for the surfacing and paving of said streets: 
174.1. Pavement Base. The pavement bases, not including the surface courses, shall be one of the following types and shall be of the following minimum thickness as designed for each street: 

 
174.2. Thickness of Pavement. The pavement shall be one of the following types and shall be designated for each street classification: 

 
* The 3 inches consists of a 1½ inch Binder and a 1½ inch surface. 
** The 3½ inches consists of a 2 inch Binder and a 1½ inch surface. 
174.3. Minimum Pavement Width. All minor residential streets shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty-three (23) feet from back of curb to back of curb. Curb radius of intersecting streets must have a minimum pavement width of 30'. All other street width requirements shall be determined by the Commission and the Council as required. 
174.4. Pavement Breaks for Utility Connections. When it is necessary for a subdivider, or any utility company, to break existing pavement for the installation of utilities, for drainage facilities, or for any other purposes, the sub-divider, or utility company, shall be financially responsible for the repair of the pavement. The pavement shall be in accordance with the specifications required herein for construction of streets. 
174.5. Curbs and Gutters. Either the regular six (6) inch or four (4) inch roll-over concrete curbs and gutters with a minimum over-all width of eighteen (18") inches shall be constructed on all Standard Streets. Cement Concrete Valley Gutter shall be permitted across minor residential streets at street intersections only when no storm sewers are available as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. Valley gutters shall be at least six (6) feet in width. Whenever driveway openings are provided for lots abutting the street, the driveway shall be six (6) inches thick and a minimum of ten (10) feet in width at the sidewalk or at the street right-of-way line. The driveway shall have a minimum three (3) foot radii at the curb line. 
174.6. Temporary Turnarounds. Temporary turnarounds shall be required at the discretion of the Commission. Said turnarounds shall consist of a Tack coat with one (1) inch of asphalt. 
174.7. Street Signs/Stop Signs. Before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued, the developer, at his expense, shall install a street sign at each intersection, or wherever one street joins another, as well as stop signs at appropriate intersections, in accordance with City specifications. Said street sign and stop sign placement shall be shown on the appropriate plans for approval by the City. 
174.8. Quality Control and Testing Requirements. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his authorized representative to insure that all tests required are made. The cost of all testing and quality control will be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories approved by the Commission. 

 
In all test reports, thickness of base and asphaltic concrete will be shown. 
174.9. Certificates of Occupancy: No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued and no building erected following the enactment of this Ordinance shall be occupied unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is placed has been accepted, opened as, or shall have otherwise received the status of a public street or an officially approved private recorded easement. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 175. - Installation of utilities. 
175.1. Water/Fire Hydrants. 
(A) Water: Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly sized by the City and connected with the public system. The lines shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve the subdivision, but in no event smaller than 8". The lines shall be sized and installed in conformance with Water Specifications for the City of Kingsland. No water line can be covered up until tested by the City for proper installation, pressure tested, and disinfected in accordance with City standards. The governing body may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation of water systems for any difference in the cost to lay oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by Mayor and Council. Developers/Contractors shall meet the requirements of the City's Back Flow Prevention Program. 
(B) Fire Hydrants: The sub-divider shall incur the cost of installing fire hydrants within the development placed at intervals not less than 500 feet apart, unless such development is within high density areas, to include commercial and apartment complexes, in which case fire hydrants are to be placed no more than 350 feet apart. After proper installation, and before any Certificate of Occupancy is issued, said fire hydrant(s) shall be inspected, tested and approved by the Kingsland Fire Department. 
(C) Water Lines/Fire Hydrants Outside City Limits: Any water lines installed outside the City limits for connection to the City water system will become the property of the City once the lines are completed, operational, meet all City requirements, and have been accepted by the City. Any developer installing water lines outside the City limits for connection to the City water system will also be required to install fire hydrants, which will become the City's property once the hydrants are inspected, tested and accepted by the City. Water lines and fire hydrants shall be installed following the same requirements for developers within the City limits. 
175.2. Sewer. A publicly connected sanitary sewer system shall be installed and the sub-divider shall incur the cost for the installation of all sewer systems which are required to serve the new subdivision, including the cost of installing and tying in with the existing water system. No sewer line can be covered up until tested by the City for proper installation in accordance with City standards. The governing body may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation of sewer systems for any difference in the cost of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by Mayor and Council. All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia and with the Sewer Specifications for the City of Kingsland. 
175.3. Gas. When gas mains are connected with the gas distribution system, the lines shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plats. The gas line shall be constructed in conformance with the gas specifications for Georgia Natural Gas Company. 
175.4. Underground Electrical System. The subdivider shall install an underground electrical system, and provide the Director of Community Planning and Development with detailed plans showing the exact location of the lines. 
175.4.1. Overhead Street Lighting. The sub-divider shall provide terminal facilities and lighting fixtures for street lighting. Placement of such fixtures shall be approved by the City. 
175.4.2. Cost of Overhead Street Lighting. The sub-divider shall assume the entire cost for installation of terminal street lighting fixtures. 
Sec. 176. - Sidewalks. 
176.1. Sidewalk Dimensions. Sidewalks shall be required within all residential subdivisions on one side of the road within said subdivision, with no cost of the sidewalk construction borne by the city. The sidewalks shall be four (4) inches thick with a minimum width of five (5) feet, unless a 10 foot width is required under Section 164.1.3. A thirty (30) inch grass-planting strip shall be provided between the back of the planting curb and the sidewalk, or at the Contractor's option, the sidewalk shall extend to the curb. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth (1/4) inch to the foot toward the curb. 
(Ord. No. 2006-14, 7-10-2006) 
Sec. 177. - Administrative procedures. 
The administrative procedures for installing the subdivision improvements required herein shall be as follows: 
177.1. When Construction May Begin. Construction and installation of any required public improvement as described herein shall not begin until the Commission has given "Preliminary Approval" of the new subdivision. The sub-divider shall then confer with the Director of Community Planning and Development to determine the method and estimated cost of the construction and installation of the required improvements. 
177.2. Plans to be Filed with the Council. Four (4) copies of all plans for streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, and other required public improvements showing the proposed plan and profile of each shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission prior to beginning construction and installation of the system. The plan shall be prepared from an actual engineering survey, originating at the existing street, sewer, sidewalk and other required public improvements, prepared on standard plan and profile sheets showing cross-sections. Each system for any one new subdivision shall be prepared by a registered Professional Engineer. 
177.3. Inspections and Approval by the Council. During the construction and installation of the required public improvements, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall from time to time make field inspections and supervise said work as predetermined and agreed upon by the Director of Community Planning and Development and the sub-divider. After completion of all the construction and installation of the required public improvements and if said work has met the specifications as described herein, as determined by the Director of Community Planning and Development, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall notify the sub-divider in writing of the approval of said work. 
177.4. Official Acceptance by the Council. The Council shall officially accept the completed work on the construction and installation of required public improvements one (1) year from the date of the written acceptance by the Director of Community Planning and Development. 
177.5. Performance Bond. If the developer does not wish to construct and install any required public improvements as described herein prior to submitting the subdivision, bond shall be required as provided for in Section 153.7, such bond being equal to the estimated cost of construction, the Council shall release ninety (90) percent of the funds in escrow with a letter of approval to the sub-divider. The remaining ten (10) percent shall remain in escrow for maintenance purposes. 
177.6. Maintenance of Completed Work. The developer shall maintain his completed work until the official acceptance by the Council, as described in Section 177.4. above. The sub-divider shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the Council. 
If a maintenance bond is posted by the developer a bond equating ten (10) percent for the construction cost shall be required. During the maintenance period, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall make final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, or in cases where funds are being held in escrow, the cost for making such corrections shall be deducted from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. If the work is acceptable at the time, the remaining ten (10) percent of the escrow funds shall be released to the developer. 
177.7. Cost of Improvements. 
177.7.1. Developer's Responsibility. The developer shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements based on the following: 
(1) Streets. Incur the cost for the construction of streets up to twenty-seven (27) feet in pavement width from back of curb to back of curb. 
(2) Water and Sewer Systems. Incur the cost for the installation of all water and sewer systems which is required to serve the new subdivision and tie in with existing water and sewer systems, based on the specifications set forth herein. 
(3) Monuments. Entire cost. 
177.7.2. Council's Responsibility. The Council shall partially participate in sharing the cost of construction and installation of required public improvements for the following conditions: 
(1) Streets. Incur cost for any additional required pavement which is in excess of twenty-seven (27) feet for streets with curbs and gutters, and any additional grading and paving related thereto. 
177.7.3. Property Owner's Responsibility. Whenever the City Council is petitioned by the property owners to up-grade an existing substandard street to a standard street, the property owners shall then incur the entire cost for said improvements based on the footage along the property line of each lot abutting the street which is being improved and on the requirements in Section 177.7 above. 
177.7.4. Estimated Costs for Construction and Installation. The current unit prices in effect at the time of submission of plans shall be used in determining the total estimated cost for construction and installation of required public improvements in new subdivisions. 
177.8. "As Built" Plans. The developer will provide the City of Kingsland two (2) sets of "As Built" plans based upon actual work constructed. Record drawing will show references for valve and person-hole locations, distances between person-holes and utility service locations. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE XVII. - CITY OF KINGSLAND SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 180. - Title. 
This ordinance will be known as "The City of Kingsland Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance" and shall be incorporated as Article XVIII of the "Zoning and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Kingsland, Georgia" replacing the existing Article XVIII. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 181. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
1. Best Management Practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
2. Board. The board of natural resources. 
3. Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
4. Certified Personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5. Coastal Marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A, 12-5-282. 
6. Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
7. CPESC. Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
8. Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
9. Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
10. Design Professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
11. Director. The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
12. District. The Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
13. Division. The Environmental Protection Division {EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
14. Drainage Structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
15. Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity, 
16. Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in Section 183.C, of this ordinance. 
17. Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
18. Final Stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas) or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
19. Finished Grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
20. Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
21. Ground Elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
22. Land-Disturbing Activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 182, Paragraph 5. 
23. Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot 
24. Local Issuing Authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
25. Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
26. Natural Ground Surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
27. Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
28. NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
29. NOT. A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
30. Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
31. Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
32. Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
33. Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
34. Phase or Phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
35. Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
36. Properly Designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
37. Roadway Drainage Structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
38. Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
39. Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
40. Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
41. Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
42. State General Permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
43. State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
44. Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss, Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
45. Trout Streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
46. Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
47. Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water. 
48. Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 8-27-2018) 
Sec. 182. - Exemptions. 
This ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted, for secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section 183 C. of this Ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 183. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can lake place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section 183 B. and C. of this ordinance. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. 
B.  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS/BMPs 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in Section 183 B and C of this ordinance shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." 
As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C. 15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et, seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To die extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et, seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 183 B. 2. of this ordinance; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17.  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any man made storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01 (r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et, seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Section 183 B. and C. of this ordinance. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 184. - Application/permit process. 
A.  GENERAL 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Kingsland without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Community Planning and Development to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Department of Community Planning and Development and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in Section 184 C. of this ordinance. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Section 183 B. and C. of this ordinance will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
3.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by Section 183 C. 15, 16 and 17 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per Section 184 B.6. have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised Plan submittal. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. 
6.  The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing arid judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 183 B. and C. of this ordinance, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  PERMITS 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by Section 183 C. 15, 16 and 17 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 184 B. 6. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the Jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (f) (1). 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 185. - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The Department of Community Planning and Development will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
B.  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The Department of Community Planning and Development shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7 (e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 186. - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY 
If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. 
B.  STOP-WORK ORDERS 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  BOND FORFEITURE 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed, if the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 184 B. 6. The Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  MONETARY PENALTIES 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 187. - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 188. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
A.  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City Council within 21 days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  JUDICIAL REVIEW 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Camden County. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
Sec. 189. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
A.  EFFECTIVITY 
This ordinance from which this article is derived shall become effective on September 9, 2016. 
B.  VALIDITY 
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
C.  LIABILITY 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 9-9-2016) 
ARTICLE XIX. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS 

Sec. 190. - Purposes. 
190.1. Purposes. This ordinance is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Kingsland, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the citing of telecommunications facilities within the City of Kingsland so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Kingsland as a pro-active city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this ordinance shall: 
(1) Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the City of Kingsland; 
(2) Protect the City of Kingsland's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3) Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, citing, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful citing of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
(5) Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the City; 
(6) Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7) Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
190.2. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1) "Antenna" means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this ordinance the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multi point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(2) "Director" means the Director of Community Planning and Development or his/her designee. 
(3) "Governing body" means the City Council of the City of Kingsland. 
(4) "Micro telecommunications facilities" are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet (3') above the top of the structure and there are no more than six (6) antennae per site. 
(5) "Macro telecommunications facilities" are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet (3') above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet (10') above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
(6) "Monopole tower" means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(7) "Telecommunications facilities" refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
(8) "Tower" means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
190.3. Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance: 
(1) Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2) Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multi point distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
(3) Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of Kingsland provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the Governing Body. 
(4) Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
190.4. Placement of Telecommunications Facilities by Zoning District. 
(1) In Light Industrial (I-L) and General Industrial (I-G) zoning districts Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of eighty feet (80') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of one hundred feet (100') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of one hundred twenty feet (120') following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
(2) In Central Business (C-1), Commercial Highway (C-2), Commercial General (C-3), Commercial Interchange (C-4) zoning districts Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty feet (50') feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director and monopole towers up at a height of eighty feet (80') designed and intended to accommodate at least two (2) users are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
(3) In Low Density Residential (R-2), Multi-Family Residential (R-3), Mobile Home (R-4), Mobile Home Park (R-5) zoning districts Micro and Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Monopole towers up to a height of fifty feet (50') feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
(4) In Single-Family Residential (R-1) and Planned Unit Development (P-D) zoning districts, Micro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the Director. 
(5) Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with Article XXV of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance as well as receipt of a building permit. 
190.5. Preferred Location Sites. 
190.5.1. Co-Location Sites: Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a Preferred Location Site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and citing components of this ordinance and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the Director or the Governing Authority to be visually obtrusive. 
190.5.2. Publicly-used Structures: Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly-used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly-used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civil centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
190.5.3 Industrial and Commercial Structures: Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be Preferred Locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roof line can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
190.5.4. Mixed Use Buildings in High Density Districts: Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also Preferred Location sites. 
190.6 Disfavored Location Sites: Any single-family residential structure or site or multi-family duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
Sec. 191. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
191.1. General Requirements for All Telecommunications Facilities: The requirements set forth in this Section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance. 
191.1.1. Building Codes and Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Director. 
191.1.2 Regulatory Compliance: 
a. All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
191.1.3 Security: All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
191.1.4 Lighting: No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the Director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
191.1.5. Advertising: No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
191.2 Visual Impact: 
a. Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c. Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d. Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e. Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
191.3 Landscaping: 
(1) Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
(2) Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
(3) The Director may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the Director. 
191.4 Maintenance Impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
191.5 Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses: 
a. Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b. Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
191.6. Lot Size and Setbacks: 
a. The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the Director may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby. 
i. Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
ii. Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
iii. Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in Section 190.7. 
b. For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten foot (10') high antenna and supporting structure requires ten foot (10') setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
191.7 Additional Requirements For Towers: 
1. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
2. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
3. At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
4. Towers shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
5. When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
6. In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
7. Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
8. Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
9. Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setbacks, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
Sec. 192. - Application procedures. 
192.1. General Application Requirements for All Building and Special Use Permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the Director by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this ordinance and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
192.1.1. Basic Information 
a. Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
b. Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of planting required in Section 190.6. A. 7. 
c. A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d. A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e. Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
i. Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
ii. Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
iii. Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
iv. Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f. A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g. Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
h. The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i. Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j. Designation of which Location Preference, identified in Section 190.5, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a Preferred Location 1 through 4 or is a Disfavored Site, describe: (a) what publicly-used building, co-location site or other Preferred Location Sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these Preferred Location sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
192.2. Five Year Plan and Site Inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
1. A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
a. Street address; 
b. Assessor's Block and Lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
c. Zoning district; 
d. Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
e. The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
f. The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
g. The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
192.3. If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the Assessor's Blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
192.4 Additional Information Requirements for Towers: 
(1) If the proposed site is zoned R-1 through R-5, P-D, and there are alternative sites in C-1 through C-4 or I-L or I-G, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The Director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The Director shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
(2) Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the Director. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such collocation is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The Director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The Director shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
(3) In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
(4) The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The Director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
(5) The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
193.4 Information. The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the Director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
193.5. Expedited Review for Building Permits Only: When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to Section 190.4 of this ordinance and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the Director will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within 10 business days after receipt of a complete application. 
193.6 Special Use Permits: 
1. A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the Director and handled in accordance with the special use permit provision of Section 262 of the Zoning Land Development Ordinance. The Planning and Zoning Commission may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of Section 190.6 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
2. In granting a special use permit, the Planning Commission may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
193.7 Co-location. Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
193.8. Appeals: Appeals from any decision of the Director may be taken by any person aggrieved or any official of the city affected by the decision of the Director. Such appeal shall be to the Board of Appeals pursuant to Article XXV of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Appeals shall be made to the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. Any decision by the Director or by the Board of Appeals denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. Any decision by the Board of Appeals denying or approving a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
193.9 Nuisances: Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of Kingsland Noise Ordinance, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
Sec. 194. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the Director any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the City may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the City may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
194.1. Abandoned Towers: 
(1) Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the City may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(2) If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
194.2. Pre-Existing Towers/Non-Conforming Uses: 
(1) All telecommunications facilities operative on February 10, 1998 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance with Article IX. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2) A telecommunications facility that has received City approval as of February 10, 1998 in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(3) Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
Sec. 195. - Penalty for violation of ordinance. 
(1)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this ordinance without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this ordinance shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1000.00 per day for each day of non-compliance or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this ordinance on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(2)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance or without obtaining that required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the City Attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
ARTICLE XX. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 200. - Planning commission. 
200.1. Membership. 
200.1.1. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of the City of Kingsland, Georgia appointed by the Mayor and Council as follows: Each Councilman shall appoint one (1) member, the Mayor shall appoint two (2) members, the Council as a body shall appoint one (1) member. 
200.1.2. The terms of the members shall be for two (2) years with terms to be staggered. 
200.1.3. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor or Council member who appointed the vacating member. The Mayor or Council shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. 
200.1.4. All members may receive compensation as determined by Mayor and Council. 
200.2. Organization, Rules, Staff, Finances. 
200.2.1. The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairman from among its members. The term of the Chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The Chairman shall be a voting member of the Commission. 
200.2.2. The Planning Commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the City. 
200.2.3. All meeting of the Planning Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the Planning Commission shall be a public record. 
200.2.4. The Planning Commission may request such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may request contracts with state planning agencies and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. All requests shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval or rejection. 
200.2.5. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purposes by the City Council. 
Sec. 201. - Duties and powers of the planning commission. 
It shall be the function and duty of the Kingsland Planning Commission to prepare for Council approval such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the Commission shall have the power and the duty to: 
201.1. Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the City of Kingsland. 
201.2. Prepare and recommend for adoption to the Mayor and Council of Zoning Decisions. 
201.3. Prepare and recommend for adoption to the Mayor and Council regulations for the subdivision of land within its political jurisdiction, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
201.4. Prepare and recommend for adoption to the Mayor and Council, a plat or plats of an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
201.5. To hear and make recommendations to Mayor and Council on special exceptions of the terms of this Ordinance upon which said Commission is required to pass under this Ordinance. 
201.6. To authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted by Planning Commission in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Planning Commission that: 
201.6.1. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; and 
201.6.2. The applications of this Ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
In addition, unincorporated areas adjacent to municipalities may be added to and included in the area under the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission for general planning and for master plan preparation and for the preparation and administration of Zoning Ordinances or Resolutions, land subdivision regulations, and official maps, provided that the governing bodies of the county and municipality shall agree to the boundaries of such additional areas, procedures for the adoption and administration of ordinances and resolutions, and regulations apply to the area, and the manner of obtaining equitable representation on the Planning Commission. Such agreement shall be formally established by appropriate official action by the governing authorities involved. 
The Planning Commission may make, publish, and distribute maps, plans and reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of its political jurisdiction to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, education, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of its political jurisdiction programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish, to the Planning Commission within a reasonable time, such available information as it requires for its work. The Planning Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon, provided, however, that the Planning Commission shall not be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. In general, the Planning Commission shall have powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning in the City of Kingsland. 
201.7. Quorum and Meetings. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum; however, no application for approval shall be denied except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Board. The Board shall meet as necessary. 
ARTICLE XXI. - PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING AN AMENDMENT TO THE KINGSLAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
The City Council may from time to time, after examination, review and hold a public hearing thereon, amend, supplement, or change the regulations contained herein, or subsequently established. 
Proposals for amendment to these regulations, whether initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or any person, firm, or corporation, shall not be acted on until a public hearing has been held by the Planning Commission as required by the following procedures and recommended to Council: 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 

Sec. 210. - Amendment to the text of the ordinance. 
When the City Council, Planning Commission, or any person, firm or corporation desires to amend, supplement, or change the text of the regulations contained herein, the following procedures shall be followed: 
210.1. An application must be submitted in writing to the Director of Community Planning and Development describing the proposed amendment, supplement, or change. All applications shall be submitted by the specified deadline prior to the regular monthly meetings of the Planning Commission. 
210.2. The application shall be sent to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation, and said Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit a report to the City Council. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. This shall be effective provided that within the thirty (30) day period there has been a regular scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission and that all information requested by the Planning Commission concerning said application has been made available to the Planning Commission. 
210.3. All applications shall be sent to the City Council with the recommendations of the Planning Commission; the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, provided that legal notice has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the hearing. 
210.4. The City Council shall hold a public hearing at the earliest possible time under the time limit spelled out above to consider the proposed text and to be read aloud into the minutes at the public hearing. The City Council shall take action on said proposed text amendment within forty-five (45) days from the date of the public hearing, except in the case where their tentative action is not in accordance with the Planning Commission's certified recommendation. In such case, the City Council shall not make any changes in or depart from the text, as recommended and certified by the Planning Commission, unless the change or departure be first resubmitted to the Planning Commission for an additional review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days to resubmit its recommendation. If the Planning Commission does not resubmit its recommendation within thirty (30) days, the City Council may proceed to take action on the amendment as it sees fit. Upon resubmission by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing as described above and take final action on the request. 
210.5. Any petition for a text amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the City Council at the discretion of the person, firm or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the Clerk of the City. 
210.6. Any petition for a text amendment to these regulations, unless said petition is initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission, shall be accompanied by a fee payment equal to the cost of advertising for the required public hearing. 
Sec. 211. - Official zoning district map amendments. 
When the City Council, Planning Commission, or any person, firm or corporation desires to amend the Official Zoning District Map, the following procedures shall be followed: 
211.1. An application must be submitted in writing to the Director of Community Planning and Development and must be accompanied with a site plan of the proposed use included in any petition for a Zoning Map Amendment. Such site plan shall include building site, parking areas, and egress and ingress into the proposed area, and shall include the existing land use on adjacent and surrounding properties. All applications shall be submitted by the specified deadline prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
211.2. The application shall be sent to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation, and said Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit a report to the City Council. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. This shall be effective, provided that within the thirty (30) day period there has been a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission and that all information requested by the Planning Commission concerning said application has been made available to the Planning Commission. 
211.3. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property or parcel of land involved in the zoning amendment one or more signs, each of which shall not be less than twelve (12) square inches in area; each sign shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the required public hearing, and the cost of each sign shall be paid by the applicant prior to the public hearing. 
211.4. Before enacting any amendment to the Zoning Map, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, provided that legal notice has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the hearing. 
211.5 The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing at the earliest possible time under the time limits spelled out above to consider the proposed Zoning Map Amendment. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be read aloud into the minutes at the public hearing. 
211.6 The Planning Commission shall make a written report of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. The Planning Commission is required to include in its investigation and recommendation, comments on the following: 
(1) Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(2) Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use and or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(3) Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
(4) Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use, which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
(5) Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
(6) Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property, which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(7) Such other matters as the Planning Commission deems relevant. 
211.7. Public Hearings. The City Council may, from time to time on its own motion or by recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend the regulations and districts herein after a public hearing has been held thereon. 
211.8. Conduct of Public Hearings by the City Council. The policy and procedures for calling and conducting hearings before the City Council are as follows: 
1) Zoning hearings shall be held during regular meetings of the City Council at a time and place provided in the published notice of the hearing. 
2) The proposed zoning action and the party initiating said proposal for zoning action shall be stated, and the Mayor shall read the published notice of the proposed zoning action to be considered by the City Council. 
3) A verbal staff report shall be made by City staff, stating the recommendation of the Planning Commission and summarizing the written report submitted for the hearing, which written report shall include the general lines of inquiry of Section 211.6 of the Kingsland Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. 
4) Both persons favoring and persons opposing a proposed zoning action shall have an opportunity to address the City Council. The party proposing a zoning amendment shall be invited to speak first, followed by persons opposed to the proposed zoning amendment. Each speaker will be asked to identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. When all opposing statements have been heard, the party proposing a zoning amendment may be permitted to rebut those statements. 
5) Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning amendment and shall address remarks only to the City Council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning action. The Mayor may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned continues to violate this requirement. 
6) The proponents and the opposition of any zoning action shall have a total of 30 minutes each to address the City Council regarding the zoning action. 
Upon request made to and approved by the City Council prior to speaking, any single individual for or against a zoning action may speak for up to 15 minutes. All other speakers shall be limited to no more than 5 minutes unless permitted additional time by the City Council. Any allowance of additional time shall not extend the overall 30 minute time limit for a particular side of the zoning action unless more overall time is granted by the City Council to permit a more complete discussion of the issue. Any rebuttal by proponents shall be allowed only within the overall time constraints set out herein. Nothing in this shall be construed to limit the ability of the Mayor to maintain decorum in the conduct of a hearing in a fair and orderly manner. 
7) Because of time constraints in hearings, interested parties shall be encouraged to submit petitions, studies, letters, and other materials. Such materials, if presented orally at the hearing, shall be subject to the time limits provided above. 
8) The City Council shall have discretion to all on previous speakers as necessary for clarification of views expressed or the materials submitted. The City Council may call for such additional view, studies, or other information from any source as then considered necessary to making a sound decision on the proposed zoning action. 
9) The City Council shall have discretion to continue a hearing to a later date if the materials submitted or views expressed require more time for study and consideration than may reasonably be allocated in one meeting. 
211.9 Notice of Public Hearing 
(a) If the rezoning decision is initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission, interested parties shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the public hearing by placement of notice in the Tribune & Georgian. Said notice shall contain the date, time and place of the public hearing and a description of the proposed amendments together with a list or map of the properties that may be affected thereby. 
(b) If an application is initiated by a party other than the City Council or the Planning Commission, the public shall be notified by posting on the subject property in a conspicuous location a sign containing the date, time and place of public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification. The sign shall be posted on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c) In addition, the public shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the public hearing by placement of notice in the Tribune & Georgian. Said notice shall contain general location of the property, present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification and the date, time and place of public hearing. 
(d) The Director of Community and Planning Development shall, in the case of a proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Maps, use his or her best efforts to mail notice of public hearing to all property owners of record within two hundred (200) feet of the property sought to be rezoned, as their names appear on the records of the Camden County Board of Assessors. 
(e) The applicant shall be informed in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date, time and place of the public hearing by the Clerk of the City Council. 
(f) Paragraphs (b) and (c) shall only apply when the application or amendment is initiated by a person or organization other than the City Council or the Planning Commission. 
211.10. Withdrawal. Once an application for an amendment has been submitted and advertised, the applicant may withdraw the application or request a postponement of the hearing date once by submitting to the Clerk of the City Council in writing his request, at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. 
In the absence of request for continuance, the zoning item will be heard on the date scheduled unless the City Council takes action to defer the zoning item. The City may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the cost of placing one advertisement in the Camden Tribune advising the public of the postponement or continuance of the date of the public hearing. The public hearing in the event of a continuance shall be rescheduled to the next succeeding regular meeting date of the City Council or the date specified in a motion adopted by the City Council. If the applicant fails to appear on date set for the public hearing, the City Council may proceed to dispose of the zoning request or dismiss the application. 
211.11. Notice. Property owners whose property is affected by any zoning decision will receive written notice thereof within seven (7) days after the decision is made by the City Council. 
211.12. Final Action By The City Council. Upon action of denial by the City Council, an application shall not be initiated for an amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property, or any part thereof, by a property owner or owners for a period of one (1) year. 
211.13. Changes to the Zoning Map. Following final action by the City Council, all necessary changes shall be made on the zoning map by the Director. A written record of the type and date of such change shall be maintained by the City Clerk. Until such change is made, no action by the City Council on amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be official. 
ARTICLE XXII. - COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 220. - Enforcement. 
220.1 The enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Director of Community Planning and Development. The Director of Community Planning and Development may cause any building, structure, place, or premises to be inspected and examined and to order the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this Ordinance. Upon failure of any person, firm, or corporation to immediately remedy any such violation, the Director of Community Planning and Development may initiate proceedings pursuant to Article XXIV of this Ordinance. In the case of repeated violations of this resolution by any person, firm, or corporation, the Director of Community Planning and Development may initiate such proceedings without first providing such person, firm, or corporation an opportunity to remedy the situation. 
220.1.1. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, non-conforming uses, or other exceptions which this Ordinance has reserved for public hearings before the Planning Commission and/or the Council. 
220.1.2. The Director of Community Planning and Development may approve plats of proposed subdivisions where said plat is in conformity with Article XV and XVI of this Ordinance. 
220.1.3. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall keep records of all and any Permits, Certificates of Occupancy issued, and all submitted subdivision plats, with notations of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made as a public record. 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
Sec. 221. - Permits and certificates. 
Permits and Certificates shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
221.1 Zoning Compliance Permit. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall issue a Zoning Compliance Permit, which may be incorporated into the Building Permit issued under the Building Code adopted by the Council, for any permitted use of land or structural alteration provided such proposed use of land or structure, or structural alteration is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
221.1.1. An application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-scale plan signed by the owner, or his authorized agent, to include, as a minimum the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; shape, size, height and location of the buildings proposed to be erected, demolished, altered, or moved, and or any building already on the lot; yard dimensions and the use of structures, including the number of dwelling units within each structure where appropriate; easements (private and public); watercourses; fences; street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
221.1.2. Each permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described in the permit during the period of construction or reconstruction. 
221.1.3. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction, or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provision of this Ordinance and other appropriate codes and ordinances of the Council then in effect, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall sign and return one (1) copy of the sketch plan to the applicant and shall issue a Zoning Compliance Permit. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall retain one (1) copy of the Zoning Compliance Permit and one (1) copy of the sketch or plan for his records. 
221.1.4. If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall not issue a Zoning Compliance Permit, but shall within 30 days return one (1) copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. Such refusal shall state the reasons for refusal and shall cite the portions of this Ordinance with which the submitted sketch plan does not comply. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall retain one (1) copy of the sketch plan and two (2) copies of the refusal. 
221.1.5. Any Zoning Compliance Permit shall automatically expire six (6) months from the date of issuance if the person, firm, or corporation to which the certificate or permit was issued has not clearly demonstrated that the permit is being exercised for the purpose for which it was issued, or if the work so authorized is suspended or discontinued for a period of one (1) year. 
Sec. 222. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued by the Director of Community Planning and Development in accordance with the following provisions: 
222.1. Certificate of Occupancy Required. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1) A building hereafter erected; 
(2) A building hereafter altered so as to effect height, or side, front or rear yards; 
(3) A change of type of occupancy or use of any building on premises. 
222.2. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. The Director of Community of Planning and Development shall sign and issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the application for such certificate and signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the Zoning Compliance Permit. 
222.3. Denial of Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch plan upon which the Zoning Compliance Permit was issued. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - FEES CHARGED FOR APPLICATIONS AND/OR PERMITS PERTAINING TO THIS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 230. - Fees charged for applications and/or permits pertaining to this ordinance. 
The following fees shall be applicable to application for the following zoning request or permits. 

 

 
REZONING: Any single-family residential use, or other uses not listed below - $125.00 

 

 
Sec. 231. - Schedule of fees for building/construction permits. 
The following fees shall be applicable to applications for the following building permit requests: 
*BUILDING FEES 

 
*A flat fee of $50.00 shall be charged if the total permit fee for any of the above permits is less than $50.00. 
FLAT FEES 

 
PENALTY FEES 

 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007; Ord. No. 2011-01, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 232. - Schedule of fees for subdivision inspection. 
The following fees shall be applicable to inspection of subdivisions for acceptance of infrastructure: 

 
(Amend. of 7-23-2007) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - ENFORCEMENT, PERMITS, PENALTIES AND FEES 

Sec. 240. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The Director of Community Planning and Development shall review building plans, inspect premises, issue building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures which meet the requirements of this Ordinance. All records pertaining to each request processed by the Director of Community Planning and Development shall be kept in a file and open for public inspection. 
Sec. 241. - Building permits and tags. 
The Director of Community Planning and Development shall issue building permits, and where required, sign tags in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code of the City of Kingsland and this Ordinance. 
241.1 Conformance of Proposal to Zoning Ordinance. Prior to the issuance of the building permit and/or tag, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall insure that the work proposed conforms, in all respects to the Zoning and Land Ordinance, in addition to the Building Code and other applicable regulations. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Director of Community Planning and Development, the City Engineer shall insure that the lot, site, tract or parcel upon which a building or structure is proposed for construction shall be of suitable elevation and topographical character to insure proper drainage. 
241.2 Information Required. The Director of Community Planning and Development may require such information from the applicant as is necessary to determine the conformity of the proposal with the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. In addition to the information specifically required in the Building Code, site plans accompanying applications shall show the following: 
The location and dimensions of proposed structures, including the number of dwelling units each building is designed to accommodate, if any; 
The setback line of buildings on the lot and on adjoining lot; 
The number, layout and dimensions of proposed parking spaces, if any; and 
The locations and dimensions of points of ingress and egress from abutting public streets or alleys. 
Sec. 242. - Certificate of occupancy. 
The Director of Community Planning and Development shall issue Certificates of Occupancy in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code of the City of Kingsland and upon a determination that the building, sign or other structure as constructed, or the change in occupancy, as proposed, conforms, in all respects, to the Zoning Ordinance, the Building Code and other applicable regulations. 
Sec. 242. - Special uses. 
242.1 General Provisions. Special uses, as listed in the various districts of Article VI of this Ordinance are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located, than do other uses permitted in the district and as such require certain controls in order to insure compatibility with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. 
242.2 Application Procedure. Applications for a special use shall be filed with the Director of Community Planning and Development prior to the deadline identified for the meeting in which it is to be reviewed by the Planning Commission and submit an application for a fee of $300.00. 
The application shall be made on proper forms and shall be accompanied by a site plan or survey showing existing and proposed structures, uses, access drives, setbacks, easements, buffer areas, parking and loading areas and any other pertinent information necessary for proper review. The Planning Commission shall review the special use application and the accompanying site plan for compliance with the regulations set forth in the Ordinance with particular reference to these requirements established for uses in those districts in which they are proposed for location. 
If the Planning Commission finds the use to be in conformance with the Ordinance and compatible with the existing uses in the area, the Planning Commission shall forward their recommendation of approval, with or without additional conditions, to the City of Kingsland for their final action. If the Planning Commission finds the use not in conformance with the Ordinance or non-compatible with the uses in the area then the Planning Commission shall forward their recommendation of denial, and state reason of such action, to the City of Kingsland for their action. 
Citizens shall be notified about the City of Kingsland's public hearing by placement of notice in the newspaper of general circulation in the City of Kingsland, (Tribune and Georgian) and by posting on the affected property a notice stating the date, time, place and special use being requested, at least then (10) days before the date of the hearing. 
242.3 Approval, Denial. The City of Kingsland and the Planning Commission in reviewing the application for a special use permit should consider the following: 
a) The effect the proposed activity will have on traffic flow along adjoining streets; 
b) The location of off-street parking facilities; 
c) The number, size and types of signs proposed for the site; 
d) The amount and location of open space; 
e) Protective screening; 
f) Hours and manner of operation; 
g) Outdoor lighting; 
h) Ingress and egress to the property; and 
i) Compatibility with surrounding land use. 
The City of Kingsland may approve the application as submitted, it may deny the application or it may impose conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. 
242.4. Classification and Duration. Permits issued for special uses shall bear the stamp "Special Use" and shall be valid only for that particular use and shall expire if the use, or operation pertaining thereto, does not commence within twelve (12) months of the date of approval or shall cease for more than six (6) months for any reason. 
Sec. 243. - Temporary uses. 
253.1 The Director of Community Planning and Development is authorized to issue a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for the following temporary uses, subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no traffic congestion, and will not adversely affect surrounding areas: 
1. Carnival or circus, in the C-2 District, C-3 District and IG District, for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days, subject to the approval of the City of Kingsland. 
2. Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure, in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 Districts, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
3. Open lot sale for Christmas trees, in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and IG Districts, for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
4. Real estate sales office in any district, for a period not to exceed six (6) months, provided no cooking or sleeping accommodations are maintained in the structure. 
5. Contractor's office and equipment sheds, in any district for a period of twelve (12) months, provided that such office be placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
243.2 All Temporary Certificates and Occupancy may be renewed without cost for an additional period not to exceed the time permitted by the original Certificate of Occupancy, provided that at the time of renewal it is again determined said use is still clearly of a temporary nature, still will cause no traffic congestion, and still will not adversely affect surrounding uses. 
243.3 All Temporary Certificates of Occupancy shall bear a stamp stating "Temporary Use". 
Sec. 244. - Sign permits and tags. 
244.1 Sign Tags. In addition to sign permits, the Director of Community Planning and Development shall also issue Sign Tags for freestanding signs. 
Such tags shall be affixed to said signs in such a way as to be easily discernible to the eye. 
244.2 Maintenance. Signs shall be maintained in accordance with the appropriate provisions set forth in the Building Code. 
244.3 Unlawful Signs. Unlawful signs shall be made to comply with all regulations or shall be removed in accordance with the appropriate provisions set forth in the Building Code. 
244.4. Violation. This Zoning and Land Development Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1983 as amended. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance constitutes a misdemeanor and every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
244.5. Zoning Enforcement. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or alter any buildings or other structures without first obtaining a building permit from the Director of Community Planning and Development or to use such buildings or structures on any land without first obtaining an Occupancy Permit from the Director of Community Planning and Development. The Director of Community Planning and Development shall not issue any permit, unless the zoning requirements of this Ordinance are complied with. 
Sec. 245. - Subdivision enforcement. 
245.1 The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without approval of the Commission constitutes a violation of this Ordinance, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transferring or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The Council through its attorney or other designated official, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
245.2. No plat or plan of a subdivision within the City of Kingsland shall be filed or recorded by a subdivider in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Camden County until it has been submitted to and approved by the Commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the Secretary of the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 246. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Kingsland shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 247. - Remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this Ordinance, the Director of Community Planning and Development, City Attorney, or other appropriate authority of the City, or any neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action of proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land. 
ARTICLE XXV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 250. - Conflict with other laws. 
Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. 
Sec. 251. - Validity. 
Each phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or other provision of this Ordinance is separable from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and other provisions. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not effect any other portion or provision of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 252. - Repealed resolution and ordinances. 
This is a comprehensive enactment of a plan of zoning and regulation of subdivisions, and all prior zoning ordinances, and/or subdivision regulations, are hereby superceded and repealed. 
Sec. 253. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the Governing Authority finds that the application of this Ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this Ordinance may be granted. 
Sec. 254. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the [validly] of the remaining portions hereof. 
Sec. 255. - Repeal of laws in conflict. 
This ordinance supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
Sec. 256. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take immediately upon adoption. 
256.1. Permit Penalties Any individual/corporation beginning a project, being the construction/addition of a building, installation of a sign, electrical, plumbing, or HVAC work prior to receiving a permit will be charge double the amount of the original price to obtain the proper permit. 
APPENDIX B—CITY MUNICIPAL POLICIES AND SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL[1] 
PART A PURPOSE 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
CITY MUNICIPAL POLICIES AND SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL 
ESTABLISHED BY ORDINANCE 2008-23 
September 22, 2008 
For technical references and details, see the City's Land Development Ordinance 
Adopted by 
CITY COUNCIL 
September 22, 2008 
Important topics: 
1. Televising of sewer lines at no cost to the city upon the city's request—-page 43 (04-29-05) 
2. Side walks in residential developments—-page 7 (7-29-08) 
3. Fire Hydrant color specification—-page 18 (7-29-08) 
4. Service Taps—-page 24 (7-29-08) 
5. Water Meter requirements—-page 24 and 25 (7-29-08) 
6. Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe—-page 28 (7-29-08) 
7. Culvert Pipe Installation—-page 60 (7-29-08) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—

PART A - PURPOSE 
WHEREAS, on the 22nd day of September, 2008, the City Council enacted and adopted an ordinance entitled "Municipal Policies and Specifications;" and 
WHEREAS, Section 2 A. of the ordinance sets forth certain policies relating to the extension of the City's water and sewer system to areas of the City not previously served by the City; and 
WHEREAS, Section 2 A.1. of the said ordinance states that "all extensions of the City water and sewer system to a site not fronting along an existing main and requiring service from the system, shall be the sole responsibility of the party or parties desiring the service"; and 
WHEREAS, Section 2. A.4. provides that "under certain conditions where water and sewer system extension provide access to previously uninhabited property and the extending party request(s) (sic) reimbursement or participation by the City, the following policy will apply. The City of Kingsland will not participate in the cost in any manner including credit of tap or impact fee, nor shall it act as an agent to the extending party to collect any assessments to the property owner"; and 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and the City Council have determined that the amendment of the aforesaid provisions of the Ordinance is necessary in order to foster industrial and commercial development within the City and in order for the City to meet certain contractual obligations it has heretofore incurred with various developers; and 
WHEREAS, the Mayor and the Council have determined that the amendment of Section 2 A.1. and 2 A.4. is in the best interest of the City and its residents; 
I. - SCOPE 
This manual amends and supplements the following publications: 
• Master Drainage Study for Camden County 
• Kingsland Comprehensive Plan 
• Kingsland Zoning and Land Development Ordinance 
Extensions of the water and sewer system made under the Community Impact Assistance program will be in accordance with an adopted plan. Should this or similar projects provide service to vacant land, it should be considered incidental and not in violation of this policy. 
After the completion of any project, a set of Record Drawings shall be submitted to the City accurately depicting the work performed. See Section VIII, "Record Drawing Checklist". 
II. - POLICIES 

A. - Water and Sewer System 
1.  All extension of the City water and sewer system to a site not fronting along an existing main and requiring service from the system, shall be the sole responsibility of the party or parties desiring the service unless the Council shall enact an ordinance expressly and specifically exempting a particular project from the effect of the aforesaid policy statement. Such an ordinance shall specifically state the obligation so incurred by the City and shall expressly state the cost and expense to be incurred by the City as a result of the construction of such extension. 
2.  This policy shall apply to all extensions along existing streets as well as proposed streets. 
3.  All design and construction of extensions to the system must be in accordance with the applicable section of the Basis of Design and Technical Specification Section of this manual. 
4.  Under certain conditions where water and sewer system extensions provide access to previously uninhabitable property and the extending party requests reimbursement or participation by the City, the following policy will apply. The City of Kingsland will not participate in the cost in any manner including credit of tap or impact fee, nor shall it act as an agent to the extending party to collect any assessment to property owner except in those instances in which the Council, by ordinance, has specifically enacted a provision permitting such practice, and at the time of the passage of such ordinance there existed a specific and detailed contract setting forth the obligation, cost and liabilities of the City, which contract was expressly approved by a majority vote of the council; and only if such ordinance specifically provides for the payment of a deposit sufficient to reimburse the City for its expenditures if the City is required by such ordinance to construct such water and sewer extensions in advance of the payment of tap or impact fees. 
5.  Taps to the City's water and sewer system shall be purchased at prevailing rates and the tap made within twelve (12) months of purchase. If the tap is not completed within the twelve (12) months, any difference in the existing tap and/or impact fee and the original amount paid must be paid prior to installation of the tap. 
6.  Taps purchased are not transferable and must be site specific. 
7.  All extensions to the system must be inspected by a City representative. The City of Kingsland Community Planning and Development Director will be responsible for permitting any extensions, and the inspecting and accepting of installations. 
8.  It shall be the policy of the City of Kingsland Municipal Utilities Department to NOT set any water meters in any development, residential or commercial, until the project has been completed to a point that is deemed of a satisfactory nature and poses no danger to the Public in general. This point of completion shall, at minimum, be completion of the water system, sanitary sewer system, and drainage system and all appurtenances. In no instance should the above minimum criteria be construed as all that is necessary to occupy the development. 
B. - Drainage Facilities 
1.  All drainage improvements required for the development of properties shall be the responsibility of the landowner. This policy applies to the on site as well as off site improvements required for improvement to private property. 
2.  Any improvements made to the property that would adversely effect downstream drainage structures or cause flooding of lands will not be allowed. Storm drainage design considerations must be submitted to City of Kingsland for review and approval prior to construction. 
3.  All design and construction of drainage improvements shall be in accordance with the applicable standards of the basis of design and technical specifications section of this manual. 
4.  Under no conditions shall the City of Kingsland participate in either on site or off site drainage structures for new developments or in areas where dedicated drainage easements do not exist. If in the past, drainage areas have been maintained by City forces without easement, the owner will be required to dedicate adequate easement to continue maintenance of the structure. 
5.  All proposed installations must be approved prior to construction and inspected upon completion. The City of Kingsland Building Inspection Department will be responsible for permitting the installation, and the Public Works Department will be responsible for inspecting and accepting the installation. 
6.  The City reserves the right to require balanced cut and fill cross sectional calculations or other method of ensuring the proposed development will not increase the 100 year flood elevation of a Flood Hazard District. 
C. - Streets 
1.  Extension of existing and/or proposed streets to or through private property shall be the sole responsibility of the landowner. This includes any clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, and appurtenant improvements. 
2.  Streets either existing or proposed not presently maintained by the City shall not be accepted for maintenance by the City unless all drainage and paving is completed in accordance with the specifications section of this manual. 
3.  All design and construction of streets shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the basis of design and technical specifications section of this manual. 
4.  All extensions shall be permitted and inspected by the Community Planning and Development Director. The Planning and Zoning Site Development Inspector will inspect and accept the street. 
5.  Driveway permits will be required for all street access requests. The Community Planning and Development Director will issue driveway permits after compliance with subparagraphs 6, 7, and 8. 
6.  All driveways and curb cuts shall conform to the requirements of Section 56.1 of the Kingsland Zoning and Land Development Ordinance as well as the Americans with Disabilities Act. Property owners requesting driveway permits must submit a detailed drawing prepared by a professional engineer showing the distance requirements of Section 56.1 , the proposed under driveway drainage structure, and any proposed utility installation in the driveway. R-1 residential areas are not required to submit detailed drawings unless these areas are located along streets classified as a collector or higher. 
7.  All driveways and curb cuts, except R-1 residential areas, shall have curb and gutter installed at the street intersection. A minimum radius of 25' in each direction, from the point of intersection will be required. Where the access intersects a State Highway, the minimum design standards established by the Georgia Department of Transportation shall prevail. 
8.  The City further reserves the right to require the installation of acceleration and deceleration lanes in nonresidential driveways. Furthermore, when the property requiring a driveway is bounded on two sides by public access, the City shall have the right to limit access to one or both streets. 
9.  The City reserves the right to require the placement of sidewalks for residential, commercial, school and church development projects. Also, sidewalks may be required to be installed along arterial streets as determined by the City. 
D. - Refuse and Dry Trash 
1.  Tree surgeon, landscape service, or similar businesses shall dispose of clippings, limbs or debris collected to a proper site at their expense. This material should not be placed on the street for City to pick up per Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18. 
2.  The City of Kingsland Public Works Department shall, in accordance with current fee schedules, provide dry trash and refuse pick up to the residents of the City of Kingsland. 
3.  The refuse to be picked up should be placed at the curb in an orderly manner in containers provided by the City. 
4.  Dry trash or any single item should be of a size that would allow a single person to lift the item onto the truck. Any limbs or portion of trees should be cut up in length of not more than eight feet and must be less than three (3) inches in diameter. Only limbs from trimming, pruning or storm damage will be picked up. Limbs placed for pickup shall not be from tree removal or land clearing. 
5.  Public Works Department should be notified when the piles are in place, so a pick up time can be scheduled. 
6.  No piles of tree stumps, logs, or trees, larger than 8' long by 4' wide will be picked up. 
7.  It shall be the responsibility of the resident and/or the property owner to remove and dispose of all major items removed from any structures that are the direct result of evictions, clean up of properties and structures between tenants and estate clean ups. Removal of items and materials resulting from the actions listed above fall outside the approved solid waste service the City of Kingsland provides. 
8.  The City of Kingsland Public Works Department shall not pick up construction debris. 
A.  Construction Debris: Defined as any material generated from construction, remodeling or repairs. This is to include carpet, padding, siding, privacy fencing, landscaping timbers, pallets, sheetrock, flooring or processed lumber. Questionable materials will be at the discretion of the Sanitation supervisor or the Public Works Director. 
9.  The City of Kingsland Public Works Department shall pick up, remove, and dispose of machinery, and other large metal objects only upon the advance notification and request of residents of the City. The Public Works Department shall provide such pickup service for a fee to be paid by the resident requesting such service. The fee for such service, along with such other rules and regulations necessary to implement such service shall be set and promulgated by the City Manager with the consent and approval of the City Council. 
E. - Street Lights 
1.  The City of Kingsland shall require street lights to be installed prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. Quantity and location shall be at the discretion of the City of Kingsland. This shall include installation of light, pole, and all appurtenances. These lights will then become part of the dedicated right-of-way and be maintained by the City of Kingsland. 
2.  Commercial, industrial and multi-family projects shall provide and maintain their own lighting systems with no monetary involvement from the City. 
F. - Inspections 
1.  The contractor shall provide the necessary manpower and equipment required for inspections. The presence of the City Engineer or Inspector at the work site shall in no way lessen the Contractor's responsibility for conforming with the plans and specifications. Should the Engineer or Inspector accept materials, or work that does not conform with plans and specifications, whether from lack of discovery or for any other reason, it shall in no way prevent later rejection of, or corrections to, the unsatisfactory materials or work when discovered. The Contractor shall have no claim for losses suffered due to any necessary removals or repairs resulting from the unsatisfactory work. Any work which has been covered without the Inspector's approval, shall at the Inspector's request, be uncovered and be made available for inspection at the Contractor's expense. Work performed before or after City staff's normal work hours or during the weekend or City holidays shall comply with the Code and shall include only such tasks that do not require observation by an Inspector. 
G. - Quality of Materials 
1.  It is the intent of this specification to provide materials which are of the highest quality and free from defects. Materials not specified herein may be used upon written approval by the City. 
H. - Maintenance of Traffic 
1.  When construction occurs in a traffic zone, traffic control devices must be erected, maintained, relocated and removed in accordance with the plans, specifications and Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition. This requirement shall apply for all construction occurring on public streets, including installation and rehabilitation by landscaping contractors and construction or repairs by utility companies. 
2.  Materials used in the fabrication and installation of construction traffic control devices shall be in accordance with the MUTCD. 
All enclosed lens (Engineers Grade) sheeting required for use on traffic control devices shall have an identification mark on the surface. This mark signifies that the sheeting meets the requirements of Federal Specification L-S-300C for Minimum Reflectivity 1 Sheeting and Tape. The identification mark shall not interfere with the function of the device, but shall be visible in both daylight and under illumination without the use of special devices. 
3.  Existing public streets or highways shall be kept open to traffic at all times unless permission to close the street, or portions thereof, is granted by the City. 
Work on any project shall not start until all traffic control devices required for the particular work activity are properly installed. 
Traffic control devices shall be properly maintained, relocated as necessary, cleaned and operated during the time they are in use. During periods when use of the devices is not warranted, they shall be removed from the work area, covered or otherwise positioned so that they do not convey their message to the traveling public. 
Weeds, brush, trees, construction materials, equipment, etc. shall not be allowed to obscure any traffic control device in use. 
Competent and properly trained, attired and equipped flaggers using "stop" and "slow" paddles shall be provided when two-way traffic cannot be maintained. 
The Contractor shall assume full responsibility for the continuous and expeditious maintenance or replacement of all construction warning signs, barricades and other traffic control devices. The Contractor shall continuously review and maintain all traffic control measures to assure that adequate provisions have been made for the safety of the public and workers. Failure to maintain all traffic control devices in a satisfactory condition shall be cause for suspension of construction operations until proper traffic control is re-established. 
4.  Contractors performing construction involving the City utility street systems shall be licensed to practice general contracting in the State of Georgia. 
5.  Contractors and their employees must comply with OSHA standards. 
6.  The operations of any Contractor shall not expose City employees to any hazardous chemicals or other occupational safety and health hazards. All contractors working on City projects or on City property shall comply with OSHA standards concerning the handling and storage of hazardous chemicals, specifically, visible display of warning and information placards for use by emergency services. The Contractor shall also advise the City of the appropriate control measures to be used by the City employees to prevent exposure and to minimize risk of exposure. 
END OF PART A  PURPOSE 
PART B  BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
I. - WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 - REFERENCE STANDARDS 
A.  American Waterworks Association (AWWA): 

 
B.  American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

 
C.  American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM): 

 
D.  Rule for Safe Drinking Water, Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD): Chapter 391-3-5 
E.  All materials must be certified as meeting National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) Standard 61 for potable water. 
1.2 - BASIS OF DESIGN 
All water system design will be in accordance with accepted criteria of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Specific reference should be "Ten States Standards for Water Works" and "American Water Works Association Standards". All designs are subject to review by the City of Kingsland and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Water lines shall be designed and sized to provide adequate fire flow. Design calculations shall be supplied to the City for review and approval prior to construction. 
1.3 - SUBMITTALS 
A.  Two copies of manufacturer's standard drawings and catalog cuts of the following items shall be submitted for approval by the Municipal Utilities Department: 
1.  Pipe 
2.  Fittings 
3.  Joints and Couplings 
4.  Hydrants 
1.4 - PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 
A.  Materials delivered to site shall be inspected for damage, unloaded and stored with the minimum of handling. Store materials on site in enclosures or under protective coverings. Store plastic piping and rubber gaskets under cover and protect from exposure to direct sunlight. Store materials above ground. Interior of pipe and fittings shall be kept free of dirt and debris. 
B.  Pipe, fittings, valves, hydrants and other accessories shall be handled to insure delivery to the point of installation in sound undamaged condition. If coatings or linings of pipe or fittings are damaged, such pipe or fittings shall be removed from the site and new materials furnished at no extra cost to the City of Kingsland. Pipe shall not be left in the sunlight, but shall be protected from exposure to direct sunlight. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 - POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE (PVC) 
A.  Polyvinyl chloride water main pipe shall conform to Designation ASTM D-2241 and shall consist of Type I, Grade I PVC compound conforming to ASTM D-1784. All pipe shall be minimum Class 160-SDR 26. The standard laying length shall be 20-ft. +/- 1 in. PVC pipe with diameters less than or equal to 3 in. shall be Schedule 40 and connected with Schedule 80 fittings. Solvent cemented joints are not allowed for buried pipes. 
B.  Pipe shall have integral bell and spigot joints. Provisions shall be made for contraction and expansion at each joint with an elastomeric ring. Threaded or solvent welded type joints shall not be used on pipe of 3" or greater. Bell end pipe and couplings with elastomeric gaskets shall meet the requirements of ASTM D-3139. 
C.  The Contractor shall install a continuous run of plastic metallic tape above the top of the PVC pipe at 18 to 24 inches below finished grade. Tape shall be suitable for detection with metal pipe location equipment, labeled to identify contents of pipe, and brightly colored to contrast with the soil. In addition to the tape, the contractor shall install a continuous run of tracer wire attached to pipe. On pipe runs greater than 500', this tracer wire shall be attached to a 2" galvanized pipe with a 180 degree bend at top extending 36" above grade for connection to locator equipment. 
D.  Pipe shall carry National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) seal, and be factory marked with manufacturer's identification, pipe size, material and pressure rating. 
2.2 - DUCTILE IRON PIPE 
A.  Ductile iron pipe shall conform with the requirements of ANSI Standard A21.51 and shall be of the thickness classes shown below: 

 
Class designations for the various classes of pipe shall be painted on the outside of each joint of pipe. Weights shall be conspicuously painted in white on each joint of pipe after the bituminous coating has hardened. 
B.  All joints shall have the same pressure rating as the pipe with which it is used. Joints shall be rubber gasketed push on or mechanical joint. Joints shall meet the requirements of ANSI A21.11. 
C.  Pipe shall be coated inside and out with a one mil thick bituminous coating conforming to ANSI A21.4. 
D.  Pipe to have calcium aluminate cement mortar with Sealcoat lining in accordance with ANSI A21.4, amine cured Novalac epoxy 40 mil or approved equivalent. 
2.3 - GALVANIZED STEEL PIPE 
This pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A120. The pipe shall be "Standard Weight", unless otherwise specified. 
2.4 - POLYETHYLENE PIPE 
The pipe supplied under this specification shall be SDR 17 high performance, high molecular weight, high density polyethylene pipe and shall conform to ASTM D2239. All pipe resin shall be manufactured by the same company that manufactures the pipe itself in accordance with these specifications to insure complete resin compatibility and total product accountability. The fittings supplied in this specification shall be molded or manufactured from a polyethylene compound having a cell classification equal to or exceeding the compound used in the pipe. To insure compatibility of polyethylene resins, all fittings supplied shall be of the same manufacture as the pipe being supplied. 
2.5 - COPPER PIPE OR TUBING 
This pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B88, Type K. 
2.6 - PLASTIC TUBING 
A.  Plastic pipe shall conform to all the requirements of the "Specifications for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR)", as they apply to ASTM D-2239-SDR 7-PE 3408. All plastic tubing shall be sized similar to copper tubing. 
B.  The hydrostatic design stress shall be 630 psi for water at 23 degrees centigrade (73.4 degrees F) and 500 psi for water at 37.8 degrees C (100 degrees F). 
C.  The polyethylene extrusion compound from which the pipe is extruded shall meet the requirements of Type III, Grade 3, Class C material as described in "Specifications for Polyethylene Molding and Extrusion Materials", ASTM D-1248, except that melt index shall be determined under a higher temperature than any of the conditions as listed in Section 6 (b) of "Method of Test for Measuring Flow Rates of Thermoplastic by Extrusion Plastometer", ASTM D-1238. The test condition shall be the same as for conditions J, except that the temperature shall be 310 degrees C (590 degrees F), with a load of 12-5 kilograms. Under these conditions, the resin shall extrude at a maximum rate of 0.25 grams per ten (10) minutes. The pipe shall be homogenous throughout and free of visible cracks, holes, foreign inclusions, or other defects. The pipe shall be uniform in color, capacity, density and other physical properties. 
D.  The size, the type of plastic pipe material, material, dimension ratio, commercial standards with which the pipe complies, the manufacturer's name and the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) seal of approval shall be conspicuously marked on the outside of the pipe at intervals of not more than five (5) feet. 
2.7 - FITTINGS 
A.  Ductile iron mechanical joint fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A21.10. The fittings shall be of the lightest class conforming to the pressure rating of the pipe lines in which they are installed; in no case shall the fittings be lighter than Class 200. 
B.  Fittings for galvanized steel pipe shall be malleable iron conforming to ANSI B16.3 except the nipples and couplings shall be the same material as the pipe. All fittings shall be hot-dip galvanized in accordance with ASTM A120. 
C.  The mechanical joints shall meet requirements of ANSI A21.11 and shall have the same pressure rating as the fitting of which it is a part. All mechanical joints to be installed using Megalug glands (or approved equal) and shall meet manufacturer installation requirements and torques. 
D.  Fittings shall be coated inside and out with one mil thick bituminous coating conforming to ANSI A21.4. 
E.  Fittings shall have calcium aluminate cement mortar with Sealcoat lining in accordance with ANSI A21.4. 
2.8 - VALVES 
A.  All valves 2" in diameter and smaller shall be constructed of brass or bronze except that the hand wheel that shall be of malleable iron construction with screwed ends. All valves 2-1/2" in diameter and larger shall have flanged ends for interior service and mechanical joints for buried service unless otherwise approved. They shall be iron body, bronze mounted, except that in the smaller sizes the valves may be all bronze. 
B.  Gate Valves: 
1.  Gate valves smaller than three inches shall meet the requirements of Fed. Spec. WW-V-54, Class 54, Class A, 125 pounds. 
2.  Gate valves shall be AWWA C509 resilient seat wedge type. 
3.  Gate valves 4" and larger shall be resilient wedge type, epoxy coated, ductile iron body; bronze mounted conforming to the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C509. Buried gate valves 16" and larger shall be gear operated. 
4.  Gate valve ends shall be mechanical joint type. Tapping valves shall be equipped with a flanged end to mate with the tapping sleeve. 
5.  Gate valves shall be equipped with a ductile iron wrench nut, open counter-clockwise and shall have upper and lower o-ring stem packing seals. 
6.  Gate valves, including gear operated gate valves shall be non-rising stem type gate valves. 
7.  Gate valves shall be products manufactured by M&H Valve, Mueller or approved equal. 
8.  Gate valves shall be installed with heavy roadway screw type valve boxes. The lid shall have the words "WATER VALVE" stamped on it. 
9.  Valves shall have two inch square operating nut, with the exception that gate valves in altitude valve pits and other similar installations shall have hand wheels. 
10.  Valves buried in ground or located in vaults or structures shall have suitable extensions for socket operation with top of operating nut located six inches below finished grades. 
2.9 - HYDRANTS 
A.  All fire hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502. 
B.  All fire hydrants shall have a 6" mechanical joint inlet connection and be equipped with a 5-1/4 inch valve, two 2-1/2 inch hose nozzles and one 4-1/2 inch pumper connection, all with ANSI (National) standard threads. Operating nuts shall be 1-1/2 inch, pentagon type. 
C.  All fire hydrants shall be designed for 150 psi working pressure and 300 psi test pressure. 
D.  All fire hydrants shall be equipped with "O" ring type stem seals. 
E.  All fire hydrants shall be designed so that clockwise rotation of the stem closes the valve and counterclockwise rotation opens the valve. Hydrant covers shall have the word "OPEN" and an arrow showing the proper rotation of the operating nut cast in or permanently attached. 
F.  An independent drain shall be provided, completely draining the hydrant after use. The drain shall be activated to the open position by the closing of the hydrant valve. The drain rod shall be easily cleaned. The drain shall have a protective shield integral with the hydrant base to minimize clogging and prevent undermining. 
G.  All working parts of the hydrant shall be easily removed for inspection or servicing without digging or the use of hoists or derricks or special tools. The hydrant cover and standpipe shall be removable without requiring the water to be shut off. 
H.  Each fire hydrant shall be equipped with a ground line mounted breakaway flange and cast iron safety stem coupling specially designed so that upon sustaining severe impact the hydrant will shear off at the ground line without loss of water in the main. 
I.  All fire hydrants shall be Mueller standard, M&H, Clow, American Darling or equal as approved by the Municipal Utilities Department and shall be yellow in color upon installation. 
J.  The minimum acceptable flow for fire hydrants is 1,000 gpm in residential areas and 1,500 gpm in other districts. In residential areas the maximum distance between hydrants, measured along street centerlines, shall be 500 feet. In business, office, institutional and industrial zoning the maximum distance between hydrants, measured along street centerline, shall be 350 feet. The minimum fire flow pressure is 20 psi. 
K.  When a fire protection system is proposed, a double check valve assembly shall be installed on the supply side of the sprinkler fire protection line for backflow prevention. 
2.10 - CORPORATION STOPS 
A.  Corporation stops shall be ball type, made of brass and complete with a compression or flared coupling and AWWA standard threads as per AWWA C800. Taps shall be located at 10:00 and 2:00 o'clock on the circumference of the pipe. Service taps shall be staggered alternating from one side of the water main to the other and at least 12 inches apart. The taps must be a minimum of 24 inches apart if they are on the same side of the pipe. Each corporation stop will be wrapped with Teflon tape for ductile iron pipe water mains. No taps are allowed on a fire hydrant line. No tapping shall be made where rodding is placed. 
2.11 - SERVICE SADDLES 
A.  Service saddles shall be bronze body (85-5-5 waterworks brass) and double strap for taps over 1 inch with silicon bronze nuts conforming to ASTM A98 and factory installed grade 60 rubber gaskets. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 - PIPE INSTALLATION 
A.  PVC pipe shall be installed in accordance with the Uni-Bell Plastic Pipe Association Guide for installation of polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe for municipal water main distribution system and the printed recommendations of the manufacturer. 
B.  Ductile iron pipe shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C600. 
C.  Pipe line alignment and gradient shall be straight, or shall follow true curves as near as practicable. Curvature in pipe lines, where required, shall be well within the allowable laying radius, horizontal and vertical. 
D.  Excavation, cleaning, laying, jointing and backfilling shall follow as closely as is possible so as to progress the work. In no case shall pipe be left in the trench overnight without completing the jointing. The completed pipeline shall not be left exposed in the trench unnecessarily, and the Contractor shall backfill and compact the trench as soon as is possible after laying and jointing is completed. 
E.  Each day at the close of work, and at all times when laying is not in progress, the exposed end of the pipe line in the trench shall be closed with a head or barrier of wood or metal. If at any time it becomes necessary to cover the end of any uncompleted pipeline with backfill, the end of that pipe shall be closed with a mechanical joint plug. 
F.  The Contractor shall keep exposed ends of pipe properly plugged during laying to prevent dirt and other materials from entering the line and shall also, before the system is accepted, thoroughly clean all lines. 
G.  Thrust Blocks or restrained joints shall be provided as specified in AWWA C600. All exposed pipes, valves, hydrants, etc. shall be securely strapped and all ends and bends braced. 
H.  Mechanical joints shall be made only by experienced mechanics. Sockets and spigots shall be washed with soapy water before slipping gland and gasket over spigot. The spigot shall be inserted in the socket full depth. The gasket shall be brushed with soapy water, and pushed into position making sure the gasket is evenly seated in the socket. The gland shall then be properly positioned for compressing the gasket. All bolts and nuts shall be tightened alternately 180 degrees apart. Sockets, spigots, glands and bolts shall be kept clean and wet with soapy water until each joint is completed. 
I.  All water services shall be properly marked above ground with PVC pipe painted blue. Additional markings shall be stamped in the curb or marked on the edge of paving with an approved permanent marker capable of being located by a magnetic locator, such as a nail with cap, if no curb is present. 
J.  Water main shall be laid at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any existing or proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or sewer manhole. Water mains crossing house sewers, storm sewers or sanitary sewers shall be laid to provide a separation of at least 18 inches between the bottom of the water main (which should be on top) and the top of the sewer. At the crossings, one full length of water pipe shall be so located that both joints will be as far from the sewer as possible. Special structural support for the water and sewer pipes may be required. 
K.  When local conditions prevent a vertical separation of 18 inches between water and sewer lines, the sewer passing over or under water mains shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe and joints that are equivalent to water main standards of construction and shall be pressure tested to assure water-tightness prior to backfilling. 
L.  All water mains shall have a minimum cover of 36 inches measured from top of the pipe to the finished grade. When water lines are installed along a roadway which does not have curb and gutter, the water line shall be installed at sufficient depth to prevent conflict with future road improvements or vertical alignment changes. 
3.2 - FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION 
A.  All fire hydrants shall have a 36-inch minimum pipe cover provided for the branch supply line and the nozzles located a minimum of 18 inches above finished grade. 
B.  Each fire hydrant shall be set on a concrete foundation at least 18 inches square and 6 inches thick and shall be blocked against the end of the trench with concrete and anchored. 
C.  Hydrant drainage shall be provided by installing around the hydrant at least 1 cubic yard of gravel or crushed stone below the top of the hydrant supply pipe. All Hydrant installations require inspection by a City of Kingsland representative prior to cover up. 
D.  All hydrants shall be installed plumb. Hydrants shall have hose nozzles parallel with, and the pumper nozzle perpendicular to, the curb line. Hydrants located behind curbs where sidewalks extend close to, or about, the curb shall be set so that pumper or hose nozzle caps will be a minimum of 6 inches and a maximum of 12 inches from the gutter face of the curb. Where set between the curb and the sidewalk, or between the sidewalk and property line, no portion of the hydrant or nozzle cap shall be within 6 inches of the sidewalk. 
E.  Immediately before installation of a hydrant, the following operations shall be performed: 
1.  The hydrant shall be thoroughly inspected. 
2.  The hydrant interior shall be thoroughly cleaned. 
3.  The hydrant shall be opened and closed to determine that all parts are in proper working order, with valves seating properly and the drain valve operating freely. 
F.  There shall be a minimum clearance of five (5) feet around the hydrant. 
3.3 - HYDROSTATIC TEST 
A.  Upon completion of backfilling operations and not less than seven (7) days after the last concrete blocking anchor has been poured; the pipe system shall be subjected to a hydrostatic test. 
B.  The system shall be filled with water and all air expelled. 
C.  The Contractor shall pressurize the system to 150% of the design pressure or 150 lbs., whichever is greater, measured at the low point in the system. 
D.  The test pressure shall be maintained for two hours. 
E.  If the pressure cannot be maintained, the cause shall be determined, corrected, and test repeated until successful. 
3.4 - LEAKAGE TEST 
A.  Following the pressure test, the system shall be subjected to a leakage test. 
B.  Leakage shall be defined as the quantity of water that must be supplied into the pipe to maintain the design working pressure after all air in the pipeline has been expelled and the pipe has been filled with water. 
C.  Leakage shall not exceed the quantity determined by the formula given below: 
L = SD (Square Root of P) / 133,200
Where L = allowable leakage in gallons/hr. 
S = length of pipe tested in feet. 
D = nominal diameter of the pipe inches. 
P = average test pressure during leakage test in psig. 
D.  If leakage exceeds the allowable rate, leaks shall be found and repaired and the test repeated until successful. 
3.5 - DISINFECTION 
A.  Water mains and accessories shall be disinfected, flushed, and disinfection liquid disposed in accordance with "Rules for Safe Drinking Water" as published by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and in accordance with AWWA C651 "Standard for Disinfecting Water Mains". 
B.  The mains shall be flushed before disinfecting by maintaining a velocity of at least 2.5 feet per second for a period of ten minutes. 
C.  The continuous feed method may be used for any size main or system where satisfactory quantity and quality water is available. The tablet method shall not be acceptable. 
D.  Following disinfection, the system shall be flushed until chlorine concentration is less than 1 milligram per liter. 
E.  Discharging of chlorinated water shall be done in such a manner acceptable to the City. 
F.  Bacteriologic Tests: 
1.  Samples shall be collected and tested for satisfactory microbiological quality of the water prior to placing the lines into service. 
2.  Tests shall be performed to detect the presence of coliform organisms on samples taken from the end farthest from the point at which chlorine was introduced into the system and at 1000 feet intervals. 
3.  If unsatisfactory samples are produced, disinfection shall be repeated until samples are satisfactory. 
4.  All testing shall be performed by a Certified Testing Laboratory and paid for by the Contractor. 
3.9 - MISCELLANEOUS NOTES 
A.  Minimum water tap size for dwellings. 
1. 3/4" for one lot or house on lot. 
2. 1" for duplex. 
3. 1-1/2" for triplex. 
B.  All tracer wire to be mechanically connected at splices. 
C.  All tracer wire to be attached to curb stops and brought to top of valve boxes. 
D.  All taps to be inspected by the City before being covered up. 
E.  All water lines to be looped at cul-de-sacs. 
F.  All new service taps on existing water lines are the responsibility of the developer or applicant. The City of Kingsland shall incur no cost associated with the taping of existing water lines. All new tap connections made to existing water lines require pressure testing at 150psi for two hours. A representative of the City of Kingsland must be present while testing and taps are being preformed. 
G.  Only potable water will be used to fill all liens for pressure testing. 
H.  All water drawn from the City will be metered and billed at appropriate rate set by Council. 
I.  Any pipe, solder, or flux used in the installation or repair of water lines must be lead-free. Pipes and fittings must not contain more than 8.0% lead. Solders and flux must not contain more than 0.2% galvanized. 
J.  All distribution mains shall be provided with sufficient earth and other suitable cover to prevent freezing. This shall be not less than 36 inches measured from the top of pipe to the finished grade. 
K.  All new service connections must be metered. 
1.  Water meters shall be Sensus Brand with wand readable capability. Meters shall be installed at finished grade. 
2.  All water meter installations with service connections larger than 3/4 of an inch shall require bypass assemblies with a lockable valve. 
3.  All meter installations requiring bypass installations require inspection by a City of Kingsland representative prior to cover up. 
L.  The Municipal Utilities Department must be notified a minimum of 48 hours prior to conducting any testing of the water distribution system. 
M.  Installation of approved water quality sampling stations shall be required by the City of Kingsland in planned residential developments exceeding three hundred units. Sampling stations shall be installed at a rate of 1 station per 400 units. 
  

END OF SECTION I  WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
II. - SANITARY SEWERS 
PART I - GENERAL 

1.1 - APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
A.  American National Standards Institute (ANSI): 

 
B.  American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

 
C.  American Water Works Association (AWWA): 

 
1.2 - BASIS OF DESIGN 
All sewer collection system design will be in accordance with accepted criteria of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Specific referenced should be Ten States Standards for Sewage Systems, Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction and design of Wastewater and Storm water Pumping Stations. 
1.3 - SUBMITTALS 
A.  Materials and methods of construction used in the sanitary sewer system shall be submitted for approval to the Municipal Utilities Department. 
B.  Two copies of shop drawings shall be submitted for the following: 
1.  Precast concrete manholes and covers. 
2.  Pipe. 
C.  Manufacturer's standard drawings or catalog cuts applicable to materials included in this section shall be submitted. 
1.4 - PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 
A.  Contractor shall exercise utmost care at all times in loading and unloading pipe, fittings, specials, and casting in order to avoid damage and shock to the materials. Lifting shall be by hoist or by rolling on skids. Dropping of materials will not be permitted. 
B.  Contractor shall be responsible for safe handling and storage of all materials as damaged materials shall not be used in the work. Materials delivered to the site shall be promptly inspected upon arrival. Damaged or defective materials to be immediately removed from the site. 
C.  All materials to be stored at least 12 inches above grade. Inside of pipes and fittings shall be kept free of dirt and debris. Rubber gaskets and plastic pipe not used immediately shall be protected from direct sunlight. Manhole units shall be handled with care to avoid chippage or breakage. 
A. PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 - POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE 
A.  Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe for gravity sewers shall be 8 inches in diameter or greater and shall be SDR-26 meeting ASTM D3034 for type PSM Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) sewer pipe. The joints shall be push-on "O" ring gasket type with integral bell and spigot meeting ASTM D3212. Threaded or solvent welded type shall not be used. 
B.  Polyvinyl Chloride pipe for pressure sewers shall be minimum Class 160 SDR26 conforming to ASTM D2241 and consisting of Type 1, Grade I PVC compound meeting ASTM D1784. Joints shall be integral bell and spigot with elastomeric gaskets meeting ASTM D3139. Threaded or solvent weld type joints shall not be used. 
C.  Marking: Pipe shall be clearly marked with: 
1.  Manufacturer's identification 
2.  Nominal pipe size 
3.  SDR and or pressure rating 
4.  Date of manufacture 
D.  The Contractor shall install a continuous run of plasticized metallic tape above the top of PVC pipe used for gravity sewer and force mains at approximately 30" below finished grade. Tape shall be suitable for detection with metal pipe location equipment, color coded, and labeled to identify contents of pipe and brightly colored to contrast with the soil. In addition to the tape, the contractor shall install a continuous run of tracer wire attached to pipe. On pipe runs greater than 500', this tracer wire shall be attached to a 2" galvanized pipe with a 180 degree bend at top, extending 36" above grade for connection to locator equipment. The maximum distance between 2" pipe stubs shall be 500'. 
2.2 - CLAY PIPE 
A.  Type: Vitrified, glazed or unglazed, extra strength conforming to ASTM C-700. 
B.  Pipe shall be bell and spigot with compression joints conforming to ASTM C425, or plain end pipe using plastic compression couplings conforming to ASTM C594. 
2.3 - CAST IRON PIPE 
A.  Type: Gray or ductile 
B.  Joints: 
1.  Push-on type in accordance with ANSI A21.11. 
2.  Mechanical joints in accordance with A21.11. 
C.  Gray iron pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.6; shall have an iron strength of not less than 18/40; designed for internal pressure of 100 psi. laying condition B, and 6 feet of cover. 
D.  Ductile iron pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.51; designed for laying condition B, and 6 feet of cover. 
E.  Pipe shall have calcium aluminate cement mortar with Sealcoat lining in accordance with ANSI A21.4, amine cured Novalac epoxy 40mil or approved equivalent. 
2.4 - POLYETHYLENE PIPE 
A.  The pipe supplied under this specification shall be SDR 17 high performance, high molecular weight, high density polyethylene pipe and shall conform to ASTM D2239. All pipe resin shall be manufactured by the same company that manufactures the pipe itself in accordance with these specifications to insure complete resin compatibility and total product accountability. The fittings supplied in this specification shall be molded or manufactured from a polyethylene compound having a cell classification equal to or exceeding the compound used in the pipe. To insure compatibility of polyethylene resins, all fittings supplied shall be of the same manufacture as the pipe being supplied. 
2.5 - PRECAST CONCRETE MANHOLES 
A.  Precast concrete sections to be manufactured in accordance with provisions of ASTM C478. 
B.  Precast concrete raiser sections to be 48 inches in diameter with minimum wall thickness of 4 inches. 
C.  Precast concrete base units to have minimum wall thickness of 5 inches. 
D.  Jointing material shall be rubber gasket type conforming to ASTM C443 or plastic material type conforming to ASTM C425. 
E.  The manhole shall be coated inside and out with an approved bituminous coating. 
2.6 - MANHOLE FRAMES AND COVERS 
A.  Frames and covers to have machined bearing surfaces. 
B.  Covers to have checkered top design and labeled CITY OF KINGSLAND SANITARY SEWER. 
C.  Combined weight of frames and covers shall be approximately 490 pounds. 
D.  Frames shall have a depth of approximately 4 inches and an access opening, of not less than 32 inches. 
E.  Covers shall have two pick holes located at edges. 
F.  Materials shall conform to ASTM A48 for Class 30 gray iron casting. 
G.  In areas where the manhole top may have occasion to be under water, watertight rings and covers will be used. 
2.7 - MANHOLE STEPS 
Manhole steps are prohibited. 
2.8 - COATINGS, LININGS AND ENCASEMENT 
A.  Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be bituminous coated on the outside. 
1.  Ductile iron pipe and fitting bituminous coating on the outside shall be an asphaltic coating approximately 1 mil thick. The finished coating shall be continuous, smooth, neither brittle when cold nor sticky when exposed to the sun and shall be adherent to the iron. All coatings shall meet the requirement of AWWA C104. 
2.  Polyethylene encasement shall be installed according to the requirements of ANSI A-21.5 and AWWA C105, Method A. 
2.9 - SEWER FORCE MAINS 
A.  Force mains shall be installed with a minimum cover of 4 feet measured from the top of the pipe to the finished subgrade. 
B.  Force mains shall be installed in dedicated public right of way or in dedicated utility easements as follows: 

 
C.  Force mains shall discharge at the invert of the receiving manhole and shall be as close as possible to 180 degrees from the outlet pipe. 
D.  Sewage combination air valves shall be installed at all the high points or runs exceeding 3000 feet of all force mains. The valve size shall be determined by the designer and approved by the City. 
E.  Force main valves shall be resilient seated wedge gate type spaced as determined by the City. Resilient seated wedge gate valves shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C509. 
B. 2.10 - LIFT STATIONS 
A.  Acceptable Manufacturers: Pumps shall be as manufactured by ABS Pumps, Flygt Corporation or approved equal as determined by the City. 
Design Calculations must be submitted to the City for review and approval prior to construction. The design shall include calculations showing how the force main size, pump selection and wetwell size were determined. Also, buoyancy calculations must be submitted for the wetwell based on the soil type and groundwater elevation. 
B.  Equipment and Materials: The pump design shall be such that the pump unit will be automatically and firmly connected to its discharge piping when lowered into place on the mating discharge connection, permanently installed in the wet well. The pump shall be easily removable for inspection or service, requiring no bolts, nuts or other fastenings to be disconnected. For this purpose, there shall be no need for personnel to enter the wet well. Each shall be fitted with a stainless steel cable of adequate strength and length to permit raising and lowering the pump for inspection or removal. A safety cable hook shall be provided for attachment of the cable to a hook at the access level. The pump, with its appurtenances and cable, shall be capable of continuous submergence underwater without loss of watertight integrity to a depth of 65 feet. All major parts, such as the stator casing, oil casing, sliding bracket, volute and impeller shall be of gray iron. All surfaces coming into contact with sludge shall be protected by a coat of rubber-asphalt paint. All exposed bolts and nuts shall be of stainless steel. 
The impeller shall be gray cast iron of non-clog design, capable of handling solids, fibrous material and other matter found in normal sewage applications. The impeller shall be constructed with a long throughlet without acute turns. The impeller shall be dynamically balanced. Static and dynamic balancing operations shall not deform or weaken it. The impeller shall be a slip fit to the shaft. Non-corroding fasteners shall be used. A wear ring system shall be installed to provide efficient sealing between the volute and impeller. 
Each pump shall be provided with a mechanical rotating shaft seal system running in an oil reservoir having separate, constantly hydro dynamically lubricated lapped seal faces. The seal unit between the pump and oil chamber shall contain one stationary and one positively driven rotating tungsten-carbide ring. The seal unit between the oil sump and motor housing shall contain one positively driven rotating carbon ring. Each interface shall be held in contact by its own spring system. The seals shall require neither maintenance nor adjustment, but shall be easily inspected and replaceable. No seal damage shall result from operating the pumping unit out of its liquid environment. The seal system shall not rely upon the pumped media for lubrication. 
The pump shafts shall be of stainless steel and shall rotate on two permanently lubricated bearings. 
A sliding guide bracket shall be an integral part of the pump unit. The volute casing shall have a machined discharge flange to automatically and firmly connect with the cast iron discharge connection, which when bolted to the floor of the sump and discharge line, will receive the pump discharge connecting flange without need of adjustment, fasteners, clamps or similar devices. Installation of the pump unit to the discharge connection shall be the result of a simple linear downward motion of the pump unit guided by no less than two guide bars. No other motion of the pump unit, such as tilting or rotating shall be required. 
Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. A guide bar system shall be installed for each pump, to permit raising and lowering the pump. Guide bars shall be 2 inch stainless steel bar of sufficient length to extend from the lower guide holders on the pump discharge connection to the upper guide. 
The pump motor shall be housed in an air filled or oil filled watertight casing and shall have moisture resistant insulation. The motor shall be NEMA Design B and designed for continuous duty. Motors shall be designed for sustaining a minimum of fifteen evenly spaced starts per hour and shall be adequate to operate the pump at every point on the performance curve without exceeding the motor nameplate. 
The pump motor cable shall be suitable for submersible pump applications. Each pump motor cable shall be 20 feet longer than the minimum length required to make the necessary connections. The additional length shall be neatly coiled and stored in the wetwell. The motor shall contain the over temperature and moisture switch for detection of over temperature and leakage conditions. Cable sizing shall conform to NEC specifications for pump motors and shall be of adequate size to allow motor conversion without replacing the cable. The cable entry water seal design shall be such that it precludes specific torque requirements to insure a watertight and submersible seal. The cable entry junction box and motor shall be separated by a stator lead sealing gland or terminal board, which shall isolate the motor interior from foreign materials gaining access through the pump top. Temperature and moisture switches shall be provided with sufficient cable length for connection to the control panel. Each unit shall be provided with an adequately designed cooling system. Thermal radiators integral with the stator housing, cast in one unit, are acceptable. Where water jackets alone or in conjunction with radiators are used, separate circulation shall be provided. Cooling media channels and ports shall be non-clog by virtue of their dimensions. Provisions for external cooling and flushing shall be provided. 
C.  Controls: Each lift station installation shall be provided with one Liquid level devices, each provided with an adequate length of electrical cable, shall be furnished and installed. A float cable holder shall be installed at the access level. The starting level and stopping level for each pump shall be independently adjustable. The flat cables shall be secured to prevent tangling of the cables as the water level rises in the wetwell. 
Each pump shall be equipped with a non-resettable elapsed time meter mounted on the front of the control panel enclosure. Meters shall record operating time to tenths of an hour. 
Provide automatic alternation of pumps mode. Provide time delays to prevent simultaneous starting of pumps. Retain low water cutoff and other protective devices in hand mode. 
Neatly arrange wiring and components and label or code. Provide control diagram and legend on inside of enclosure cover. 
D.  Accessories: Furnish and install aluminum access frames, rated for 300 lbs./sq. ft., on the influent pump station and grating cover for the effluent pump station. Each complete with hinged and flush locking mechanism, upper guide holder and level sensors cable holder. Frames shall be securely placed, mounted above the pumps. 
Frame shall be provided with sliding nut rails to attach the accessories required. Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. Guide bars shall be stainless steel pipe of the size indicated on drawings. The guide bars shall not support any portion of the weight of the pump. 
Furnish stainless steel lifting chain, eye, and wall mounted hook for each pump. Provide two chain grabs for hoist attachment, designed to slip down over the chain and grab the chain at the bottom of the chain for lifting and to release and be removed from the chain without entering the wetwells. 
Furnish a mix-flush valve system to automatically flush the sump during initial operation of the pumps. The mix-flush valve must be compatible to the pumps being installed to ensure proper operation. Spare parts furnished for each pump shall include but are not limited to one set of mechanical seals, gaskets and wearing ring. 
E.  Painting: Pumps shall be primed and finished at the factory. No field painting shall be required except for touch ups. 
Furnish 6" diameter bypass hook-up for each lift station. 
Security fencing shall be of the complete protection type consisting of aluminum, wood or other material acceptable to the City. 
Aluminum fences shall be seven (7) feet high overall, consisting of 2" mesh × 9 gauge × 72" aluminum coated steel fabric, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM A491. The fence shall have a 7 gauge aluminum coated steel coil spring tension wire along the bottom of fence fabric. Three strands of 12 1/2 gauge aluminum coated steel of barbed wire with 4 point aluminum barb spaced 5 inches apart mounted on barbed wire support arms shall be installed along the top of the fence fabric. 
Post shall be galvanized line post, 2 1/2" O.D. (3.65 lbs. per ft); galvanized corner posts, 3" O.D. (5.79 lbs per ft); galvanized gate posts, 4" O.D. (9.11 lbs per ft); galvanized top rails, 1 5/8" O.D. (2.27 lbs per ft) with extra long pressed steel sleeves. Corner and gate post shall have necessary struts and tie bracing. 
Gates shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide double leaf gate positioned to accommodate direct access to the wetwell. Gates shall be equipped with heavy duty latches and keepers. The fenced in area shall facilitate maintenance equipment access to and from the site. 
F.  Site Cover Preparation: When the backfill is completed to elevation shown on the plans, the entire site area shall be covered with crushed stone and treated with weed killer. The site shall then be covered with a black plastic liner prior to installing a minimum of six (6) inch thick layer of crusher run, crushed No. 57 stone, gravel or other material approved by the City. 
The pump station site shall be graded to drain to conform to the approved construction plans. The fence, access road and grassing shall be constructed after the site has been graded. 
G.  The City will require the installation of telemetry equipment with rain gauge for each lift station. The telemetry system shall be Omni or approved equal. 
H.  The City will not accept ductile iron piping within the lift station. 
  

2.11 - GREASE TRAP AND INTERCEPTORS 
A.  New facilities 
1.  All newly constructed food service establishments shall be required to install a grease interceptor, approved by the City of Kingsland. Grease interceptor shall be sized at twenty (20) gallons per food service seat, with no interceptor less than 1,000 gallons total capacity. 
2.  All grease trap/interceptor plans and specifications must be reviewed and approved by the City of Kingsland prior to installation. 
3.  The construction and location criteria for grease interceptors shall be in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) guidance document, "On-site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems". 
4.  All grease interceptors, whether singular or in series, must be directly accessible from the surface and must be fitted with an extended outlet sanitary tee that terminates 6 inches — 12 inches above the tank floor. The minimum access opening dimensions shall be 18 inches × 18 inches. 
5.  All grease interceptor service fixtures where the total sewage flow exceeds 1,500 gallons per day must either be two chambered or individual tanks in series. If two chambered, the dividing wall must be equipped with an extended elbow or sanitary tee terminating 6 inches — 12 inches above the tank floor. An extended outlet sanitary tee must also be provided at the outlet of the second chamber. Both chambers must be directly accessible from the surface. 
6.  Maintenance of grease traps/interceptors must include thorough pump out and/or cleaning as needed, with a minimum frequency of four (4) times per year. Maintenance contracts may be required to be submitted to the City of Kingsland. The owner is ultimately responsible for the proper maintenance of the grease trap facility. 
7.  No new food service facility will be allowed to initiate operations until grease handling facilities are installed and approved by the City of Kingsland. 
B.  Enforcement 
Failure to comply with this standard may be grounds for penalty and/or discontinuance of service. Additionally, failure to comply may result in notification to the County Health Department for request of enforcement action which may lead to revocation of food service permits. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 - INSTALLATION 
A.  All pipe to be installed in accordance with manufacturer's current printed instructions. 
B.  Plastic piping installation shall be in accordance with ASTM D2321 Recommended Practice for non-pressure pipe and ASTM D2774 Recommended Practice for pressure pipe. 
C.  Clay pipe installation shall be in accordance with ASTM C12 Recommended Practice. 
D.  Cast iron pressure piping shall be installed in accordance with AWWA Standard C600. 
E.  Service sewers shall be constructed of same material as the mains. 
F.  Gravity mains shall be installed in dedicated public right of way or in dedicated utility easements as follows: 

 
G.  Sewer mains shall be deep enough to serve the adjoining property and allow for sufficient slope in lateral lines and shall have the following minimum covers. These requirements may be waived at the direction of the City, in which case ductile iron pipe shall be installed. 
• 4 feet from the top of pipe to finished subgrade in roadways. 
• 3 feet from the top of pipe to finished grade outside roadways. 
H.  There shall be a minimum 5 foot horizontal separation between parallel gravity and force mains. 
I.  Public gravity sewer mains shall be a minimum of 8 inches in diameter. 
J.  Sanitary sewer manholes shall be spaced at a maximum distance of 400 feet. 
K.  Sanitary sewer manhole tops shall be elevated above the 100 year flood plain elevation or shall be equipped with vents and watertight frames and cover. 
L.  Inside drop connections shall be used when free drops exceed 30 inches. 
M.  Sewer line shall not be laid closer than 10 feet horizontally to a water main. Pressure sewer lines shall pass beneath water lines at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water line. Where sanitary sewer lines pass beneath water lines, no joints in the sewer line shall be closer than 3 feet, horizontal distance, from the water line. All joints of the sewer pipe shall be equidistant from the water line at the crossing, of water and sewer lines. The distance shall be measured edge-to-edge. 
N.  Unusual conditions - When local conditions prevent a horizontal separation of 10 feet, a water main may be laid closer to a storm or sanitary sewer provided that: 
1.  The bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer; 
2.  Where this vertical separation cannot be obtained, the sewer shall be constructed of materials and with joints that are equivalent to water main standards of construction and shall be pressure tested to assure water tightness prior to backfilling. 
O.  Normal conditions - Water mains crossing house sewers, storm sewers or sanitary sewer shall be laid to provide a separation of at least 18 inches between the bottom of the water main and the top of the sewer, whenever possible. 
P.  Unusual conditions - When local conditions prevent a vertical separation as described in Section H, the following construction shall be used: 
1.  Sewers passing over or under water mains should be constructed of the materials described in Section G.2. 
2.  Water mains passing under sewers shall, in addition, be protected by providing: 
a.  A vertical separation of at least 18 inches between the bottom of the sewer and the top of the water main; 
b.  Adequate structural support for the sewers to prevent excessive deflection of joints and settling on and breaking the water mains; 
c.  That the length of water pipe be centered at the point of crossing so that the joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the sewer. 
Q.  No water main or pipe shall pass through or come into contact with any part of a sewer or sewer manhole. 
R.  Pipe installation shall proceed up-grade with pipe bells or groove on the upper end. Pipe to be laid with joints close and even, butting all around. Sagging joints will not be tolerated. Pipe shall be straight and show uniform grade between manholes, laid to line and grade. 
S.  True bearing surface shall be given to invert throughout entire length of pipe. Bell holes shall be dug so the pipe barrel will carry the loads. Pipe shall be bedded in undisturbed earth. 
T.  Where sewers or force mains are to be connected to existing manholes or other structures, and where no stub or opening has been provided for the connection, the Contractor shall make an opening of minimum diameter through the side wall of the structure for inserting the sewer pipe. After inserting the pipe, the space remaining outside the pipe shall be completely filled with non-shrinking mortar and made watertight. 
U.  Lateral connection made to the sewer prior to backfilling shall be laid on a slope not exceeding 2 feet vertical to 1 foot horizontal, and not less than 1/8 inch per foot, in such a manner that the lateral shall have a solid bearing on undisturbed earth as stipulated for pipe sewers. The lateral shall make such a horizontal angle with the sewer line that a proper connection with the wye or tee branch or slant is obtained without trimming the pipe and with no danger of jointing material being forced into the sewer. All laterals shall be closed by means of suitable stoppers or end caps. Double service laterals will require a cleanout to be located at the property line. 
V.  Wye or tree branches shall be installed so that the lower lip of the branch is not more than 2 inches below the outside top of the pipe. Tees shall not be installed with the branch vertical. After installation, wye or tee branches shall not be covered with backfill until determination and record has been made of the locations of each with reference to the nearest manhole downstream and the direction in which the wye faces. 
W.  All laterals shall be properly marked at the point where laterals terminate with PVC pipe painted green. Additional markings shall be stamped in the curb or marked on the edge of paving with an approved permanent marker capable of being located by a magnetic locator, such as a nail with cap, if no curb is present. 
X.  Tracer wire shall be placed on all gravity and service laterals. Wires shall be connected to manhole rings. 
Y.  All collection lines shall be provided with sufficient earth and other suitable cover to prevent freezing. This shall be not less than 36 inches measured above the top of pipe. 
3.2 - LEAKAGE TEST 
A.  Upon completion of pipe installation, line will be tested for leakage by either infiltration tests or exfiltration tests. 
B.  Testing shall be made prior to making connections with other sewers, pipes or drains. 
C.  Maximum allowances for infiltration and exfiltration tests shall be 25-gallons/day/inch diameter/mile of pipe. 
D.  Exfiltration test: 
1.  Conduct test when water table is below invert of pipe. 
2.  Measure exfiltration by filling a reach of sewer to provide internal pressure and observing either a drop in head or the quantity of water required to maintain the reach in a full condition. 
3.  Contractor to provide a head of at least 3 feet above the top of the pipe at the upper end of the pipe line being tested. 
4.  The filled reach of line to stand until the pipe has reached its maximum absorption, but not less than four (4) hours. 
5.  Reestablish the head after absorption. 
6.  Measure the amount of water required to maintain established water level during a two-hour test period. 
7.  Correct any defects if leakage is above the specified maximum. 
E.  Infiltration Test: 
1.  Conduct test when water table is above invert of pipe. 
2.  Measure infiltration by means of weir or approved devices. 
3.  Correct any defects if measured quantity is above the specified maximum. 
F.  Hydrostatic Test For Force Mains: 
1.  Upon completion of backfilling operations and at least 7 days after the last concrete blocking anchor has been poured, the pipe system shall be subjected to a hydrostatic test. 
2.  System to be filled with water and measures taken to expel all air. 
3.  Contractor to pressurize system to 150 percent of the design pressure, measured at the low point in the system. 
4.  Pressure test to be maintained for 2 hours. 
5.  If pressure cannot be maintained, the cause shall be determined, corrected and test repeated until successful. 
G.  Leakage Test for Force Mains: 
1.  Following the pressure test, the system shall be subject to a leakage test. 
2.  Leakage shall be defined as the quantity of water that must be supplied into the pipe to maintain the design working pressure after all air in the pipe has been expelled and the pipe has been filled with water. 
3.  Leakage shall not exceed the quantity determined by the formula given below: 
L = SD (Square Root of P) / 133,200
Where L = allowable leakage in gallon/hr. 
S = length of pipe tested in feet. 
D = nominal diameter of the pipe inches. 
P = average test pressure during leakage test in psig. 
4.  If leakage exceeds that determined by formula, the leaks shall be found and repaired and the test repeated until successful. 
H.  Correct all localized or spurting leaks of any volume detected in sewers or in appurtenant structures. 
I.  All leaks, defective joints, pipes, and structures, or defective construction shall be promptly corrected at no expense to the City of Kingsland. 
3.3 - DEFLECTION TEST 
A.  Sewer Mains - It is the responsibility of the Contractor to assure that backfill is sufficient to limit deflection for all PVC pipe, 8" diameter and larger, to no more than 5% of the internal diameter of the pipe which shall be tested by a mandrel permitting no greater than maximum 5% deflection. All pipe shall be tested no sooner than 30 days after installation. All pipe not passing the 5% deflection limitation test shall be repaired or removed and replaced. 
The mandrel shall be pulled through the pipe (SDR26) with the following diameter: 

 
B.  Sewer Laterals — It is the responsibility of the Contractor to assure that installation and backfill is sufficient to limit obstructions and deflections in the laterals. Laterals shall be tested by dropping a tennis ball in the upstream end of the pipe. The tennis ball must show up at the next downstream manhole. If not, the lateral must be repaired or removed and replaced. The tennis ball may be followed by water to help with its travel to the next downstream manhole. 
3.4 - CLEANING 
Contractor shall clean completed system of any debris or obstructions prior to acceptance by the City of Kingsland. 
3.5 - TELEVISING OF GRAVITY SEWER MAIN 
Contractor shall have the sewer line televised and recorded at no cost to the City of Kingsland when deemed necessary by the City. The video should be of a quality that any and all structural defects, such as cracked pipes, rolled gaskets, etc., can be easily identified and located. The video should also contain all pertinent information including but not limited to location, line size, material, starting manhole, direction headed, distance from starting manhole to service connection, and length of line. 
3.6 - INSPECTION PROCEDURES 
A.  Upon completion of installation of the gravity sewer system, the City of Kingsland Municipal Utilities Department should be notified 24 hours prior to the inspection and lamping of the system. The Contractor is responsible for having the system ready for inspection by having the manhole lids removed and the lines free of all silt and debris. The Contractor shall also supply a ladder for entry into the manholes and a light source of sufficient brightness to illuminate the full interior of the pipe between manholes. 
B.  Upon completion of or during the lamping of the sewer system, the entire system will be subjected to a deflection test by pulling a mandrel through the pipes in the system. The mandrel shall be supplied by the Contractor and shall be capable of detecting any deflection exceeding 5 degrees. The mandrel should not pass through excessively deflected pipes or joints. If any deflections are found, the system will be deemed to have failed inspection. The Contractor shall repair the deficiency at no cost to the City, and a new inspection scheduled on the failed portion. 
C.  All sewer taps shall be inspected by the City of Kingsland prior to being covered. 
3.7 - INSTALLATION OF LIFT STATIONS 
A.  Before ordering any materials or doing any work the Contractor shall verify all measurements concerning the equipment and layout. No extra compensation shall be allowed for differences existing between actual dimensions and those indicated in the manufacturer's recommendations. 
B.  Factory Tests 
1.  The pumps shall be tested at the place of manufacture in accordance with the standards of the Hydraulic Institute for testing of pumps. Each pump shall be tested with the actual drive unit to be furnished on the job. The test reports shall cover the complete range of the pumps and shall contain the information necessary to demonstrate that the units are in conformance with these Specifications. The following shall be recorded for each pump tested. 
a.  TDH vs. capacity. 
b.  Pump efficiency vs. capacity. 
c.  Horsepower vs. capacity. 
d.  Speed of rotation. 
2.  Six copies of all certified test reports shall be submitted to the City. 
C.  Installation: The pumps, drives and accessories shall be installed, tested and adjusted and the installation certified in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements. 
D.  Field Testing 
1.  Following installation and checkout, the ability of the pumps to operate under actual field conditions without overheating, leakage or excessive wear, vibration, or noise shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City. 
2.  Before placing installation into service, the pumps shall be run continuously with the motor not submerged for 30 minutes under full load current with no damage resulting to the pump motor. The pumps shall, during this test, produce the designed GPM and TDH condition and experience a heat rise of no more than 45 degrees C above ambient temperature. 
3.  In the event any of the pumping equipment fails to meet the above test requirements, it shall be modified and retested in accordance with the requirements of this Manual. 
4.  Each pump's performance shall be documented by obtaining concurrent readings showing motor voltage and amperage, pump suction head and pump discharge head. Such readings shall be documented for at least three pumping conditions. One test shall be at shut-off head. Each power lead to the motor shall be checked for proper current balance. 
5.  The Contractor shall submit two certified copies of all test results to the City prior to acceptance of the installation. 
E.  Pump Warranty 
The pump manufacturer shall warrant the units supplied against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of five years or 10,000 hours. Warranty shall apply to parts and labor prorated over 60 months. For the first 18 months, 100% parts and labor apply. The warranty shall be in printed form. 
END OF SECTION II  SANITARY SEWERS 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
III. - BASE AND PAVING CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
PART I - GENERAL 

1.1 - APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
A.  When used in this section, the term "Standard Specifications" shall mean the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia Standard Specifications For Construction of Roads and Bridges. current edition, unless amended herein. 
B.  American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): 
D698 Test for, Moisture-Density Relations for Soils 
D1557 Test for, Moisture-Density Relations for Soils 
1.2 - BASIS OF DESIGN 
All street design will be in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation standard specifications and design standards. See Section 172, "Additional Street Design Requirements", in the Kingsland Land and Development Ordinance. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 - MATERIALS 
A.  Base: The base shall conform to Section 310, Graded Aggregate Construction, of the Standard Specifications. 
B.  Prime: The prime coat shall be RC-70 and shall conform to Section 412, Bituminous Prime, of the Standard Specifications. 
C.  Tack Coat: The tack coat shall be asphaltic cement (grade to be determined by engineer) and shall conform to Section 413, Bituminous Tack Coat, of the Standard Specifications. 
D.  Intermediate Course (Binder): The intermediate course shall be Type B Asphalt Concrete and shall conform to Section 400, Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction of the Standard Specifications. 
E.  Surface Course - Asphalt Plant Mix: The surface course shall be type F asphaltic concrete, Group 1 or 2, 135 lb/sy and shall conform to Section 400 of the Standard Specifications. 
F.  Paint: Paint for pavement marking shall be Traffic Line Paint and shall conform to Section 870, Paint, of the Standard Specifications. 
G.  Concrete Curb and Gutter: Shall conform to Section 441 - Concrete Curb, Gutter, Combination Curb and Gutter, Header and Median of the Standard Specifications. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 - COMPACTION 
A.  Subgrade: The upper 12 inches of subgrade soils in all cut areas and all fill areas that are to receive new pavements shall be scarified and recompacted until a density equivalent to 98% Modified Proctor maximum dry density in accordance with ASTM D698 has been obtained. 
B.  Base: All base shall have minimum compaction of 100% of the maximum density obtained by the test procedure present in ASTM D1557, Method D (Modified Proctor). The maximum permissible lift thickness shall be 6 inches (compacted). 
C.  Moisture Content: Compaction shall be performed only when the moisture content of the soil is within 4% of the optimum moisture content at the time of compaction as determined by ASTM D698. Soils are to be dried prior to compaction by disking and aeration. An Independent Testing Laboratory shall determine if soils are within the optimum moisture content. 
3.2 - CONSTRUCTION 
A.  Preparation of Subgrade: Prior to placing of base and pavements, the construction of all utility lines (water, sewer, power, gas, etc.) which are to be placed under the pavements shall have been completed. 
B.  Base: The base course shall be constructed in accordance with Section 310 of the Standard Specifications to the compacted thickness specified (6" minimum). 
C.  Prime: The prime coat shall be applied at a rate of 0.25 gallons per square yard and in accordance with Section 412 of the Standard Specifications. 
D.  Tack Coat: The tack coat shall be applied at a rate of 0.10 gallons per square yard and in accordance with Section 413 of the Standard Specifications. 
E.  Intermediate and Surface Course - Asphalt Plant Mix: The intermediate and surface courses shall be constructed in accordance with Section 400 of the Standard Specifications to the thickness indicated. All thicknesses are compacted. 
F.  Painting Centerline Stripe: Contractor shall paint a 4 inch wide broken yellow paint stripe in the center of all new streets. Broken centerline shall consist of painted segments of 15 feet long with 25 foot unpainted gaps between painted segments per DOT standards for traffic control. 
G.  Existing pavement that has pavement markings damaged by this construction shall be repainted. 
H.  Concrete Curb and Gutter: Shall be constructed in accordance with Section 441 of the Standard Specification. 
3.3 - TESTING THICKNESS 
The City, at the Contractor's expense, shall require as many tests as necessary to determine the average thickness of the base course prior to the placing of the intermediate course. The average thickness of all specimens shall be at least the specified thickness of the base course. In areas where there is a deficiency in the thickness of the base course the intermediate course shall be increased in thickness the amount of the average deficiency of all tests. The intermediate course shall be tested and any deficiency shall be made up in the surface course. If tests show a deficiency of one fourth in the surface course, the Contractor shall be required to place an additional surface course of one inch in thickness. 
3.4 - EXISTING PAVEMENT RESTORATION 
A.  Pavement damaged due to construction shall be patched or replaced as directed by the City Engineer. 
B.  Pavement damaged by new utility trenches shall be restored as follows: 
1.  Concrete Pavement Replacement 
a.  Existing pavement shall be removed to a minimum of 12 inches on either side of the trench. 
b.  Granular base material shall be placed to a minimum depth of 6 inches and compacted to 100% maximum dry density following trench backfilling and compaction. 
c.  Depth of concrete pavement replaced shall match the existing pavement or shall be a minimum of 6 inches thick whichever is greater. 
d.  Concrete paving slab shall be reinforced with No. 4 bars spaced 12 inches on center each way. Minimum clear distance from the bottom of the slab to the reinforcing steel shall be 2 inches. 
e.  Joints and finish of the slab shall match existing pavement. 
2.  Asphalt Pavement Replacement 
a.  Existing pavement shall be removed to a minimum of 12 inches on either side of the trench. 
b.  Granular base material shall be placed to a minimum depth of 6 inches and compacted to 100% maximum dry density following trench backfilling and compaction. 
c.  A 5-inch asphalt surface shall be laid after a tack coat is applied to the bottom and the sides of the area to be patched. The tack coat shall be applied at the rate of 0.10 gallon per square foot and can be either sprayed or brushed on. The patch shall be rolled in both directions with a 5-ton roller. 
d.  Joints and finish shall match existing pavement. 
3.  Maintenance of Surface 
a.  Pavement damage due to settlement of backfill: Repair for a period of one year. 
END OF SECTION III  BASE AND PAVING CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
IV. - STORM DRAINAGE AND APPURTENANCES 
PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 - APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
A.  Appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance with the referenced Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Drawings. 
B.  American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM): 

 
1.2 - BASIS OF DESIGN 
All drainage related design will be in accordance with Camden County Drainage Study, Engineering Handbook prepared by Thomas N. Debo, Ph.D. and with this manual, Public Works Policies and Specifications. In the case of conflicts, design criteria found in this manual shall take precedence. 
PART 2 - PRODUCTS 

2.1 - MATERIALS 
A.  Storm Drainage Pipe: Pipe shall be one of the following materials: 
1.  Reinforced Concrete Pipe shall conform to ASTM Specification C-76 and shall be sized in accordance with Section 1.12. Pipe shall be Class III minimum and as indicated on GA. D.O.T. Standard 1030 D. 
2.  Corrugated metal pipe shall conform to AASHTO designation M-36, AREA Manual 1-4 requirements for corrugated metal culverts, or Federal Specification QQ-C-806, with the following applicable requirements: 
a.  The outside and inside surfaces of the corrugated metal pipe shall be completely coated with bituminous material with a minimum thickness of 0.05 inch at the crest of the corrugations. Immediately prior to the application of the bituminous coating, the corrugated metal pipe shall be cleaned of all dirt, grease, mill scale, or loose rust and shall be dry. 
b.  The outside and inside surfaces of the corrugated metal pipe shall be completely coated with a pure aluminum coating metallurgically bonded by an alloy layer between the steel and the aluminum. The coating shall be applied at a minimum of 1 oz./sq. ft., 2 mils each side. The weight of aluminum (total both sides) shall be as follows: Minimum check limit triple - spot test = 1.00 oz./sq. ft., minimum check limit single - spot test = 0.90 oz./sq. ft. The aluminized steel pipe shall be Armco Aluminized Steel Type Z or equal. 
c.  In cases where corrugated metal pipe is used, headwalls shall be installed on each end to protect the pipe ends from damage. The headwalls shall comply with applicable sections of the GA. D.O.T. Specifications. 
d.  All rivets shall be placed in the inside valley of the corrugations. The interior coating shall be protected against damage from insertion or removal of struts or tie wires. Lifting lugs, where used, shall be so placed as to facilitate moving the pipe without damage to the exterior coating. All lateral pipes shall be sixteen (16) gage. All pipes under traffic areas will be twelve (12) or fourteen (14) gage. 
3.  HDPE Pipe shall conform to AASHTO Designation M 294 and MP 6 Type S or Type D, Federal Highway Administration FP-95, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Standards CEGS-02410 and CEGS-02720. 
a.  Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe shall only be used under pavement areas when a minimum cover of four feet can be maintained, unless approved by City Engineer. 
b.  Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe shall be gasketed bell type coupling system that meets or exceeds the soil-tightness requirements of Section 23, subparagraph 23.3.1.5.4(e) of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges and rubber O-Ring gaskets that conform to ASTM-F477. 
c.  Extruded pipe and blow molded fittings shall be made of virgin PE compounds which conform with the requirements of class 335420C as defined and described in ASTM D3350, except that the carbon black content shall not exceed 5%. 
4.  Hardie Pipe shall be fiber reinforced concrete pipe and shall conform to ASTM C1450. 
B.  Pipe Joints: 
1.  Joints for concrete pipe shall be one of the following types: 
a.  Bell and spigot with rubber gaskets. 
b.  Tongue and groove with rubber gaskets. 
c.  Tongue and groove with preformed plastic gaskets. 
2.  Rubber gaskets shall conform to ASTM Specification C443. Only a neutral agent shall be used as lubricant. Preformed Plastic Gaskets shall conform to Federal Specification SS-S-210, Type 1-rope form. 
3.  Joints in corrugated metal pipe shall be made with standard coupling bands. Coupling bands shall be as specified in Federal Specification WW-P-405, except that connecting angles shall be omitted and circumference of the band shall be such that, when coupled, there will be a 3 inch lap. For tightening each coupling band, four 1/2 inch diameter zinc-coated steel rod hoops with silo lugs shall be provided on riveted pipe the longitudinal seam rivets which would be under the coupling band shall be omitted and that portion of the seam welded. 
C.  Precast Concrete Manhole Sections: ASTM C478, except that manhole ladders shall not be permitted. 
D.  Masonry Manholes: Shall be constructed of the following materials: 
1.  Brick: ASTM C32, Grade MS. 
2.  Concrete Masonry Units: ASTM C139. 
3.  Mortar of Masonry: ASTM C270, Type M. 
4.  Aggregate for Masonry Mortar: ASTM C144. 
5.  Water: Water for Masonry Mortar shall be fresh, clean and potable. 
E.  Metals 
1.  Frames, Covers, and Grating: Frames, covers, and grating shall conform to ASTM Specification A-536 and shall be of ductile iron. 
2.  Manholes Steps: Manhole steps will not be permitted. 
2.2 - DELIVERY AND STORAGE 
A.  Storm Drainage Pipe: Care shall be exercised in loading and unloading pipe, fittings, specials and castings at all times in order to avoid shock and damage to the materials. Lifting shall be by hoist or by rolling on skids. Dropping will not be permitted. The Contractor shall be responsible for the safe handling of all materials and no damaged materials shall be used in the work. Materials shall be inspected upon arrival at the site, and any damaged or defective materials shall be immediately removed from the site. All materials shall be stored above grade. 
B.  Cementious Materials: Cementious materials in bags shall be stored in enclosed structures. Floors shall be elevated above the ground a distance sufficient to prevent the absorption of moisture. 
C.  Metal Items: Metal items, including reinforcing steel, shall be stored above grade in a manner which will not cause excessive rusting or coating with grease or other objectionable materials. 
D.  Aggregates: Aggregates shall be stored on areas to prevent the inclusion of foreign material. Aggregates of different sizes shall be stored in separate piles. Stockpiles of coarse aggregate shall be built in horizontal layers not exceeding 4 feet in depth to minimize segregation. Should the course become segregated, it shall be remixed to conform to the grading requirements. 
E.  Brick, Concrete Masonry Units and Precast Concrete Manholes: Brick, concrete masonry units and precast concrete manholes shall be handled with care to avoid chipping and breakage, and shall be stored to protect them from contact with the earth and exposure to the weather, and shall be kept dry until used. Masonry units or precast concrete containing frost or ice shall not be used. 
PART 3 - EXECUTION 

3.1 - DRAINAGE PIPE 
A.  Each section of pipe shall be carefully examined before being laid, and defective or damaged pipe shall not be used. 
B.  Under no circumstances shall pipe be laid in water, and no pipe shall be laid when trench conditions or weather are unsuitable for such work. Diversion of drainage or dewatering of trenches during construction shall be provided as necessary. Pipe shall be laid true to line and grades indicated and shall rest upon the pipe bed for the full length of each section. Runs of pipe shall be laid with outside bells or grooved ends upgrade beginning at the lower end of the pipeline. Pipe having its grade and/or joint disturbed after laying shall be removed, cleaned and relaid. 
C.  When pipes are protected by headwalls or connect with drainage structures, the exposed ends of the pipe shall be placed or cut flush with the inside face of the structure. After the pipe is cut the rough edges shall be smoothed up in an approved manner. All pipes shall be laid so that markings are on top and the inner surfaces abut neatly, tightly and smoothly. 
D.  All pipes in place shall be inspected by a City of Kingsland representative before being covered and concealed. Contractor shall clear all pipe of silt debris prior to final acceptance. 
3.2 - CORRUGATED METAL PIPE JOINTS 
Corrugated metal pipe shall be butted to form a smooth joint; the space between the pipe and coupling bands shall be kept free from dirt and grit so that the corrugations fit snugly. The coupling band, while being tightened, shall be tapped with a softhead mallet of wood, rubber, or plastic to take up slack and insure a tight joint. Coupling band bolts and damaged areas of coupling bands and pipe shall be given a coating of asphalt cement. Pipe on which the asphalt coating has been damaged to such extent that satisfactory field repairs cannot be made will be replaced. 
3.3 - CONCRETE PIPE JOINT 
A.  Joint installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer of the joint material. Surface to receive lubricants, cements, or adhesives shall be clean and dry. Gaskets and jointing materials shall be affixed to the pipe not more than 24 hours prior to the installation of the pipe, and shall be protected from the sun, blowing dust, and other deletions agents at all times. Gaskets and jointing materials shall be inspected before installation of the pipe, and any loose or improperly affixed gaskets and jointing materials shall be removed and replaced. 
B.  The pipe shall be aligned with the previously installed pipe, and the joint pulled together. If, while making the joint, the gasket or jointing material becomes loose and can be seen through the exterior joint recess when the joint is pulled up to within one inch of closure, the pipe shall be removed and the joint remade. 
3.4 - CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE PIPE JOINTS 
A.  Couplings shall not reduce or impair the overall integrity or function of the pipeline. 
B.  Only couplings supplied or recommended by the manufacturer should be used. The proper coupling to be used, either soil tight or water tight shall be determined by the Public Works Department. This decision will be made on a case by case basis. 
C.  Couplings shall provide sufficient longitudinal strength to preserve pipe alignment and prevent separation at the joints. Couplings shall be bell and spigot or split couplings. Split couplings shall engage at least two full corrugations on each pipe section. Stainless steel bolts and nuts shall fasten split couplings. 
3.5 - MASONRY WORK 
A.  Mortar for Masonry: Mortar for brick masonry, rubble stone masonry, and for bedding cast iron frames in masonry shall be Type M, conforming to ASTM C270. 
B.  Mortar for parging Masonry Walls: Mortar for parging masonry walls below grade shall be Type M, conforming to ASTM C270. 
C.  Brickwork: Brick in circular walls shall be laid in all header courses to form full and close mortar joints, ends, and sides in one operation. Vertical joints shall be radial from the center. Brickwork around pipe inlets and outlets shall be built using sufficient mortar to seal the pipe tight in the wall. 
D.  Concrete Unit Masonry: Walls shall be constructed in horizontal courses, with vertical joints broken. Units shall be laid in mortar and all joints shall be filled completely with mortar. 
E.  Masonry Structures: Masonry structure walls shall be constructed of brick, concrete masonry units or precast concrete structural sections. 
3.6 - PRECAST CONCRETE 
Walls shall be constructed on a footing of cast-in-place concrete, except that precast concrete base sections may be used for precast concrete structure risers. Precast base sections shall conform to the applicable requirements for precast risers and tops in ASTM C478. Mortar that has hardened to the extent that it cannot be made workable without the addition of water shall not be used. Thickness of parging shall be not less than 1/2 inch. No parging will be permitted on the inside of structures. Parging will not be required for precast concrete structures. Joint work inside masonry structures shall be smooth. 
3.7 - METAL WORK 
Iron and steel shall be formed to shape and size with sharp lines and angles. Shearing and punching shall produce clean true lines and surfaces. Casting shall be sound and free from warp, cold shuts, and blowholes that may impair their strength or appearance. Exposed surfaces shall have a smooth finish and sharp well-defined lines and arises. The necessary rabbets, lugs, and brackets shall be provided. 
3.8 - FIELD TEST 
A.  A light held in a drainage structure shall show a practically full circle of light through the pipe when viewed from the adjoining end of the line. 
B.  Lines under pavement shall be tested for infiltration by means of a suitable weir or other device as directed. When determination of infiltration is not practicable because of dry trench conditions, an ex-infiltration test shall be applied by filling with water so that the hydraulic head will be a least 4 feet above the crown of the upper end of the section being tested. The amount of leakage (infiltration or exfiltration) shall not exceed 500 gallons per inch of diameter per day per mile of pipe. Water for testing shall be furnished by the owner. All water drawn from the City will be metered and billed at the appropriate rate set by the City Council. 
PART 4 - DESIGN CRITERIA 

4.1 - Hydrology 
A.  The Rational Method may be used for drainage areas up to 100 acres. 
B.  Soil Conservation Service (SCS) methods may be used for drainage areas up to 2000 acres. 
C.  Other methods may be used for large watersheds (>500 acres) with the approval of the City of Kingsland Public Works Department. 
D.  Channel and ditches shall be designed to carry the design flow at non-erosive velocities. Calculations indicating design velocities shall be provided along with typical channel cross section. The maximum allowable design velocity in grass channels is 4 feet per second. 
E.  Calculations on hydraulic grade line (HGL) shall be performed and submitted for approval on entire storm drain system. 
F.  Drainage calculations shall be provided for all developments by a registered professional engineer and shall be signed and stamped by that engineer. Storm drainage must be reviewed and approved prior to construction. 
G.  The Designer shall provide sufficient design data to show how the storm drainage system will work for projects to be developed in phases. Projects being developed in phases shall be designed to adequately handle the post development storm water conditions without adversely affecting the surrounding properties. 
4.2 - Storm Drains and Culverts 
A.  Piped collection systems for public streets (catch basins, inlets, cross drains, and longitudinal piping) shall be designed for the 25-year frequency storm event. Catch basins and inlets shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for the design flow shall not exceed six feet. 
B.  Road culverts shall be designed for the 25-year storm event with a minimum size of 18" circular or equivalent. Road culverts shall be reinforced concrete pipe unless otherwise approved by the City of Kingsland Public Works Department. 
C.  The minimum full flow velocity in storm drains and culverts shall be 2 fps and a maximum velocity of 10 fps. 
D.  The minimum cover for storm sewer pipe shall be 2 feet to finished subgrade under roads and 1 foot to finished grade in non load bearing areas. 
E.  Pipe shall not project into a drainage structure but shall be finished flush with the inside of the structure. 
F.  All public storm sewers shall be installed in right of way or easements. Minimum easement widths shall be 20 feet for pipes up to and including 48 inches in diameter and 30 feet for pipes greater than 48 inches in diameter. 
G.  All ditches, grades, elevations, and culvert sizes to be shown on plans shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
H.  Culvert pipe installed under driveway locations and through drainage easements shall meet the following requirements. Culvert pipe ends must extend a minimum of three 3 ft. beyond paved driveways with a minimum of a 1 foot vertical to 3 feet slope to the invert elevation. 
4.3 - Storm Water Detention 
A.  Storm water detention will be required for all developments, both commercial and residential, when the development will cause an increase in peak rate of runoff by more than 1 cubic feet per second for the 10 year frequency storm event. 
B.  Storm water detention facilities shall be designed so that the post development discharge does not exceed the predevelopment discharge for all storm events up to and including the 25-year frequency storm and for all durations. 
C.  The detention facility shall be provided with an overflow device or emergency spillway to accommodate the 100-year frequency storm. In cases where an emergency spillway is not provided, the outlet device shall be designed for the 100-year frequency. 
D.  The detention facility, including basin, overflow, and outlet device, shall be clearly depicted in plan and cross-section and thoroughly dimensioned on the construction drawings. 
E.  All detention facilities shall be owned and maintained by an established homeowners' association, the developer, or owner of the land on which the detention facility is built. At no time will the City of Kingsland accept or maintain such detention facilities. However, in case of an emergency, the City reserves the right to perform any maintenance deemed necessary and then bill the owner of the facility for necessary material, equipment and labor. This may be done at the discretion of the City Public Works Department. 
F.  The following are exemptions from the requirements of storm water detention: 
1.  Agricultural land management activities. 
2.  Additions or modifications of existing detached family dwellings. 
3.  Developments that do not disturb or alter more than 10,000 square feet of land area. 
4.  Developments of property where the runoff resulting from the proposed development enters a federally identified flood zone as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency without crossing intermediate property. Increase from the uncontrolled runoff must be adequately transmitted through existing storm drain structures downstream of the subject development. 
END OF SECTION IV  STORM DRAINAGE AND APPURTENANCES 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
V. - RAILWAY AND HIGHWAY PIPE CROSSINGS 
PART I - GENERAL 

1.1 - APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
A.  American Water Works Association (AWWA): 

 
B.  American Railway Engineering Association (AREA): 

 
C.  Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, Standard Specifications: 
1.  Section 615 - Jacking and Boring Pipe. 
1.2 - RAILROAD CROSSINGS 
A.  Utility crossings shall be made in strict accordance with the applicable sections of the American Railway Engineering Association Specifications and the specifications of the owner of the railway being crossed. The Railway Engineer shall be notified prior to beginning construction. Construction shall not commence before such permits are acquired. 
B.  Railroad crossings shall be either carrier pipe encased in a larger bored or jacked casing pipe or as allowed by the Railroad. 
C.  The developer or property owner shall be responsible for obtaining the permit. 
1.3 - HIGHWAY CROSSINGS 
A.  Utility crossings shall be made in strict conformance with all applicable sections of the State Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, Specifications. The district highway Engineer shall be notified prior to beginning construction. 
B.  The contractor and/or developer will prepare all the necessary permits prior to beginning construction. Construction shall not commence until all permits are acquired. 
C.  Highway crossings shall be by one of the following methods: 
1.  Boring 
2.  Jacking 
3.  Tunneling 
PART 2 - EXECUTION 

2.1 - METHODS OF INSTALLATION 
A.  Boring or jacking shall be in accordance with AREA 1-4-19 and 1-5, DOT Specification 615 as follows: 
1.  Bored or jacked installation, approved by the Railroad or DOT Engineer, shall have a bored hole diameter essentially the same as the outside diameter of the encasing pipe plus the protective coating thickness. If the bored hole diameter is greater than the outside diameter of the pipe, including the thickness of the coating by more than 1 inch, or if voids should develop during the operation and are determined to be detrimental to the work then the voids shall be pressure grouted with an approved mix. 
2.  The carrier pipe shall be as shown on the plans and approved by the City Engineer. If the carrier pipe is steel without casing then the pipe shall be designed to the maximum continuous length possible, thickness and size according to the application needed. The aforementioned steel shall comply with ASSA C 200 and shall be lined and coated in accordance with AWWA C203, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Adapters shall be provided between steel pipe and pipe of other materials. 
3.  All casing pipe shall be steel, fully bituminous coated in accordance with AREA 1-4-13. Metal thickness shall be as follows: 
MINIMUM WALL THICKNESS FOR STEEL CASING PIPE 

 
4.  Steel casing pipe shall conform to AWWA C200. Steel casing pipe shall be of maximum length possible for the applications intended and shall be welded in conformance with AWWA Specification C 206. Steel casing pipe shall be at least 2 inches greater than the largest outside diameter of the carrier pipe including bells, lugs, etc., for carrier pipe less than 6 inches in diameter; and at least 4 inches greater for carrier pipe 6 inches and over in diameter. 
5.  Casing pipe shall be jacked or bored in place with allowances made for lines and gradients of the carrier pipes. After the casing pipe is installed, the carrier pipe shall be installed within it to the exact line and gradient with an approved casing spacer. All joints shall be restrained within the casing pipe as well as the first joint outside of the casing pipe on either end. 
6.  When the carrier pipe has been installed and securely anchored inside the casing pipe, the ends of the casing shall be plugged with a masonry plug. 
7.  Construction effort shall not cease when such cessation might tend to harm the total crossing effort. Protective measures shall be taken to protect the railroad and highway as well as the crossing pipe. Pipe work and tunnels shall be protected at the end of each working day against the weather and any other danger. 
B.  Tunneling 
1.  Tunneling will not be allowed unless extreme circumstances exist that will not allow other means of crossing. 
2.  The Contractor must apply for permit to the railroad or DOT and obtain approval from the City of Kingsland. 
END OF SECTION V  RAILWAY AND HIGHWAY PIPE CROSSING 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
VI. - TRENCH EXCAVATION, BACKFILL AND COMPACTION 
PART 1 - GENERAL 

1.1 - SCOPE 
Work under this section shall apply to furnishing all materials, equipment and labor for excavation, trenching and backfilling for utility systems. "Utility system" shall include underground piping and appurtenances for water distribution systems, storm water drains, and sewer collection systems. 
1.2 - EXISTING UTILITIES 
A.  Before opening trenches, the Contractor shall examine all available records and explore for the location of all subsurface pipes, valves or other structures and reference such locations on the surface. (CALL BEFORE YOU DIG! Utilities Protection Center: 1-800-282-7411) 
B.  In opening trenches, every effort shall be made not to interfere with these utilities structures. Expose existing piping by hand before excavating by machine. Excavate existing utilities sufficiently in advance of pipe laying to determine crossing arrangement. Slight deviations may be permitted in order to clear such structures. The Contractor shall be entirely responsible for the preservation of all underground or overhead utility lines and structures, such as gas, water, sewer lines, telephone conduit, power lines, etc., and shall replace, adjust or repair, without cost to the City, any such lines damaged or interfered with as a result of their construction. 
C.  Schedule work to keep roads and utilities in useable condition; coordinating all operation with the City of Kingsland to avoid inconvenience insofar as practicable. 
1.3 - EXCAVATED MATERIAL 
All material to be excavated shall be classified as earth. 
1.4 - QUALITY ASSURANCE 
A.  All excavation within the rights-of-way of City streets and County, State or Federal roadways, shall be backfilled in accordance with the then prevailing requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation, Highway Division. 
B.  Reference Standards: Methods of Sampling and Testing of American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
PART 2 - EXECUTION 

2.1 - GENERAL EXCAVATION 
A.  The Contractor shall do all excavation of whatever substances encountered to depth shown on plans. Excavated materials not required for fill or backfill shall be removed from the site as directed by the engineer. 
B.  Contractor is to provide three (3) foot minimum ground cover over utility. 
C.  Excavation for manholes and other accessories to have 12 inches minimum and 24 inches maximum clearance on all sides. 
D.  Excavation shall not be carried below the required level. 
E.  Where excavation is carried below grades indicated, the contractor shall refill same to the proper grade with compacted earth, or as directed by the design engineer or City Inspector. 
F.  Banks of trenches shall be vertical unless soil conditions pose danger to personnel or material or conflict with OSHA regulations, in which case the latter will take precedence. 
G.  Width of trench shall be 6-inch minimum, 8-inch maximum, on each side of the pipe bell. The bottom of trench for sewers and culverts shall be rounded so that an arc of the circumference equal to 0.6 of the outside diameter of the pipe rests on undisturbed soil. 
H.  Bell holes shall be excavated accurately to size by hand. 
2.2 - UNSUITABLE BEARING MATERIALS 
Should unsuitable bearing materials be encountered at levels indicated and found to have insufficient bearing values, the City Inspector may order the excavation carried to lower depths. 
2.3 - PIPE BEDDING 
A.  The contact between a pipe and the foundation on which it rests is the pipe bedding. 
B.  Classes of Bedding: Four (4) classes of bedding to be used for pipes in trenches are described as follows: 
1.  Class A - Concrete Cradle or Concrete Arch Bedding: This class of bedding may take either of two forms. 
a.  Concrete Cradle - The pipe shall be bedded in a monolithic cradle of plain or reinforced concrete having a minimum thickness of 1/4 the inside pipe diameter or a minimum of 4 inches under the barrel and extending up the sides for a height equal to 1/4 the outside diameter. The cradle shall have a width at least equal to the outside diameter of the pipe barrel plus 8 inches. Backfill above the cradle and extending to 12 inches above the crown of the pipe shall be compacted carefully. 
b.  Concrete Arch - The pipe shall be embedded in a carefully compacted granular material having a minimum thickness of 1/4 the outside diameter between barrel and bottom of trench excavation and extending halfway up the sides of the pipe. The top half of the pipe shall be covered with a monolithic plain or reinforced concrete arch having a minimum thickness of 1/4 the inside diameter at the crown and having a minimum width equal to the outside pipe diameter plus 8 inches. 
2.  Class B - First Class Bedding - Class B bedding may be achieved by either of two construction methods. 
a.  Shaped Bottom with Tamped Backfill. The bottom of the trench excavation shall be shaped to conform to a cylindrical surface with a radius at least 2 inches greater than the radius to the outside of the pipe and with a width sufficient to allow 3/5 of the width of the pipe barrel to be bedded in fine granular fill placed in the shaped excavation. Carefully compacted backfill shall be placed at the sides of the pipe to a thickness of at least 12 inches above the top of the pipe. Shaped trench bottoms shall be used only with the approval of the City Inspector. 
b.  Compacted Granular Bedding with Tamped Backfill. The pipe shall be bedded in compacted granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. The granular bedding shall have a minimum thickness of 1/4 the outside pipe diameter and shall extend halfway up the pipe barrel at the sides. The remainder of the side fills and a minimum depth of 12 inches over the top of the pipe shall be filled with carefully compacted material. 
3.  Class C - Ordinary Bedding: Class C ordinary bedding may be achieved by either of two methods: 
a.  Shaped Bottom. The pipe shall be bedded with "ordinary" care in an earth foundation formed in the trench bottom by a shaped excavation which will fit the pipe barrel with reasonable closeness for a width of at least 50% of the outside pipe diameter. The side fills and area over the pipe to a minimum depth of 6 inches above the top of the pipe shall be filled with lightly compacted fill. The shaped bottom bedding shall be used only with the approval of the City Inspector. 
b.  Compacted Granular Bedding with a Tamped Backfill. The pipe shall be bedded in compacted granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. The granular bedding shall have a minimum thickness of 4 inches under the barrel and shall extend 1/10 to 1/6 of the outside diameter up the pipe barrel at the sides. The remainder of the side fills and to a minimum depth of 6 inches over the tip of the pipe shall be filled with lightly compacted backfill. 
4.  Granular pipe bedding material shall be well graded crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the requirements of ASTM C33, Gradation 67 (3/4 inch to No. 4). A well graded gravel meeting these same requirements can also be used. 
5.  Where ledge rock, compact rocky or gravely soil, or other unyielding foundation material is encountered, the pipes shall be bedded in accordance with the following additions: The hard unyielding material shall be excavated to the elevation of the bottom of the concrete cradle (Class A bedding) or below the bottom of the pipe and the pipe bell (Class B, C or D bedding), to a depth of at least 6 inches (15 cm). The width of the excavation shall be at least 5/4 the outside diameter of the pipe and it shall be refilled with granular material. 
2.4 - BRACING AND SHORING 
A.  The Contractor shall do all bracing, sheeting and shoring necessary to perform and protect all excavations as required for safety. 
B.  All bracing, sheeting and shoring shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, most recent edition, as produced and published by the Southern Building Code Congress International. 
2.5 - DEWATERING FOR EXCAVATION 
A.  The Contractor shall pump or remove any water accumulated in any excavation area and shall perform all work necessary to keep excavations clear of water while foundations, structures or any masonry are being constructed or while pipe is being laid. 
B.  No structure or pipe shall be laid in water, and water shall not be allowed to flow over or rise upon any concrete, masonry, or piping until same has been inspected and the mortar or joint material has cured. 
C.  No extra compensation will be allowed for removal of water. 
D.  All water pumped or bailed from the trenches or other excavation shall be conveyed in a manner to a point of discharge where it will neither cause a hazard to the public health, nor damage to the public or private property, or to work completed or in progress. 
2.6 - BACKFILL 
A.  The soil at the sides of a pipe and above it is the backfill. 
B.  Prior to backfilling any excavation, all piping and structures shall be observed by the City Site Development Inspector if he so desires. 
C.  After pipes have been tested and approved, backfilling shall be done with approved material free from large clods or stones. 
D.  Backfill shall be placed in uniform layers, four inches thick, on both sides of the pipe and thoroughly compacted with pneumatic or hand tampers. The backfill shall be brought up uniformly on both sides of the pipe and compacted to an elevation of one foot above the top of the pipe, after which the fill shall be placed in eight-inch lifts. 
1.  Backfill shall be compacted to not less than 95% of the maximum dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 (Standard Proctor Test). 
2.  The top 18 inches of backfill under any paved area shall be compacted to 100% Standard Proctor. 
3.  Water settling will not be permitted in clay soils. It may be required at the option of the City Inspector in sandy soils. 
2.7 - REPLACING PAVEMENTS 
A.  Subgrades shall be compacted with a mechanical tamper. 
B.  Concrete pavement to be replaced in accordance with Section III Part 3.4-B-1, "Concrete Pavement Replacement." 
C.  Use high-early-strength cement if road is to be opened in less than three (3) days. 
D.  Asphalt pavement to be replaced in accordance with Section III Part 3.4-B-2, "Asphalt Pavement Replacement." 
END OF SECTION VI  TRENCH, EXCAVATION, BACKFILL AND COMPACTION 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
VII. - EROSION CONTROL 
PART I - GENERAL 

1.1 - SCOPE 
The work specified in this section consists of furnishing, installing and maintaining temporary erosion controls and temporary sedimentation controls as well as establishing final stabilization of the site. 
1.2 - BASIS OF DESIGN 
All erosion and sedimentation control shall be prepared in accordance with the City of Kingsland Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Committee of Georgia, should be used as a reference manual. 
PART 2 PRODUCTS 
2.1 - MATERIALS 
All erosion and sedimentation control devices shall be in conformance with the current edition of the "Manual For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control In Georgia", published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
PART 3 EXECUTION 
3.1 - SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
A.  Silt dams, traps, barriers and appurtenances shall be installed and shall be maintained in-place for duration of construction. 
B.  Hay bales shall be staked with two (2) 1" × 4" wood stakes per bale driven eighteen (18) inches into the ground and finishing flush with the top of the bale. 
1.  Install two (2) stakes per bale with the long dimension of the stakes parallel to the long dimension of the bale. 
2.  Where bales are installed in multiple layers, the bales shall be installed with vertical joints staggered and two (2) 1" × 4" wood stakes per bale driven through all layers, full from top of bale to eighteen inches into the ground. 
C.  Hay bales, which have deteriorated, shall be replaced with new materials. 
D.  Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be maintained in a condition, which will retain unfiltered water. 
E.  The Contractor shall construct the sedimentation ponds and control devices prior to clearing and grubbing the site to insure complete silt control. When the silt or the debris level is greater than 1 foot above the bottom of the pond, the Contractor shall remove the silt or debris to restore the proper elevation for the bottom of the pond. 
F.  The Contractor shall have all erosion and sedimentation control devices in service and operating properly prior to completion and final acceptance of the contract. 
G.  All phases of construction must be completed in accordance with the Erosion and Sedimentation Act 12-7-1 et seq., and no water main must be installed on or in close proximity of an abandoned landfill site or any site used for waste disposal. 
3.2 - RESPONSIBILITY 
The Contractor shall be solely responsible for insuring that no silt or debris leaves the immediate construction site. Any silt or debris that does leave the immediate site shall be cleaned up and the area disturbed shall be returned to its natural state as directed by the City at the Contractor's expense. 
END OF SECTION VII  EROSION CONTROL 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
VIII. - RECORD DRAWING CHECKLIST 
PART I - GENERAL 
The following requirements will be applied to each record drawing plan developed for the City of Kingsland. Record drawings shall be prepared in ink by revisions to the original Engineering Plan or a Mylar copy of the original. Record drawings will have the original data lined through and the record drawing data added to the drawing. At no time will the original data be accepted as the record drawing data. Each sheet shall be labeled "RECORD DRAWING" in one inch letters and have the appropriate certification block added for signature by a Surveyor or Engineer. The following items shall be required for all record drawings. 

1.1 - GENERAL RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  The first sheet of the set will have a vicinity map in the upper right hand corner. 
B.  All record drawings for major projects (determined by Director of Community Planning and Development) are required to be 24" × 36". They shall bear the name, address, and telephone number of the firm preparing the drawing and the date the record drawing data is added to the original or mylar via the revision block. 
C.  Surveyor's/Engineer's statement (with embossed or wet seal and with original signature on each sheet) shall verify that record drawings reflect the true conditions in the field. 
D.  Contractor's statement (with original signature on each sheet) shall verify that all construction specifications and product qualities have been met or exceeded. 
E.  "RECORD DRAWING" shall be labeled on each sheet in 1-inch high letters. 
F.  Street names shall be on all streets. 
G.  If the utility system is to be private (not to be dedicated to local authority), then so state on each sheet. 
H.  The location and elevation of the benchmark referenced will be shown on the drawing. If the referenced benchmark is not within the project, then a complete description of location will be provided for future locating. 
I.  Digital copy of Record Drawings shall be furnished on compact disk or other method acceptable to the City. 
1.2 - WATER SYSTEM RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Locate valves, fittings, services, and fire hydrants in two directions. 
B.  Locations shall be perpendicular to the right-of-way and parallel to the water main. 
1.  Lot lines may be used to locate water services. 
2.  Permanent structures that are properly located may also be used. 
3.  Radial ties are not acceptable. 
C.  All horizontal distances shall be shown to the nearest foot. All vertical distances shall be shown to the nearest tenth of a foot. 
D.  Show all sizes and types of valves and pipes. 
E.  Special detail drawings may be required where installations are not shown on contract drawings for whatever reason or where required for clarity. 
F.  Show location and elevations on pipes and fittings where changes in direction occur. 
G.  Typical water service installation details with deviations from original plans shall be noted on record drawing drawings. 
1.3 - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  All piping, wyes, tees, valves, manholes and special cases shall be located in two directions, in the same manner as water locations. 
B.  Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical dimensions shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot. 
C.  Identify runs of gravity (i.e., 300 feet of 8" PVC SDR 35 at 0.4%). 
D.  Elevations shall be given for the top of all manhole covers and for all inverts. 
E.  Service laterals are to be identified with location of end service or plug (station and offset measured upstream). 
F.  Manholes shall be identified by types. 
1.3 - FORCE MAINS RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Locate all valves, fittings, etc. in two directions as above. 
B.  Locations of pipe shall be shown at all changes in direction. 
C.  Show all sizes and types of valves, fittings, pipe, etc. 
D.  Special detail drawings will be required where installations were not as shown on original drawings due to field conditions or where required for clarity. 
1.4 - PUMP STATION RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Wetwell size and location shall be shown. 
B.  Elevations for top, bottom, inverts, adjacent ground, type, and size of lines and fittings for all lines entering or leaving the wetwell. 
C.  All schedules, which show pump, motor and electrical data shall be amended and shall be submitted with wetwell drawings. 
D.  All improvements within the pump station boundaries shall be located horizontally and vertically to the nearest tenth of a foot (i.e., valve pit, pump-out, water spigot, wetwell, control panel, bends, fittings, etc.). 
1.5 - DRAINAGE SYSTEM RECORD DRAWING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  All drainage structures shall be located by plus and tie from right-of-way line. 
B.  Provide elevations for all drainage structures, top, invert, bottom, etc. 
C.  Identify size, material, and slope of all piping. 
D.  Provide spot elevations, and cross sectional information, as well as slope, on all ditches, canals, etc. 
E.  Show all drainage easements and encroachments to those easements on the record drawing drawings. 
F.  Record drawing information required on storm water basins shall consist of: 
1.  Spot elevation on top of bank to confirm minimum design bank elevation; 
2.  Elevation of water stage at date of record drawing; 
3.  Elevation of top of control structure, throat, faces, or underdrain; 
4.  Location of top of bank and existing water edges at time and date of taking elevations; 
5.  Spot elevation on the bottom of lake if dry or requested by the City Engineer. 
END OF SECTION VIII  RECORD DRAWING CHECKLIST 
PART B BASIS OF DESIGN AND TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
IX - AS-BUILT CHECKLIST 
PART I - GENERAL 
The following requirements will be applied to each As-Built plan developed for the City of Kingsland. As-Built drawings shall be prepared in ink by revisions to the original Engineering Plan or a mylar copy of the original. As-Built drawings will have the original data lined through and the As-Built data added to the drawing. At no time will the original data be accepted as the As-Built data. Each sheet shall be labeled "AS-BUILT" in one inch letters and have the appropriate certification block added for signature by a Surveyor or Engineer. The following items shall be required for all "As-Built" drawings. 
GENERAL AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  The first sheet of the set will have a vicinity map in the upper right hand corner. 
B.  All As-Builts for major projects (determined by Director of Community Planning and Development) are required to be 24" × 36" and shall bear the name, address, and telephone number of the firm preparing the drawing and the date the As-Built data is added to the original or mylar via the revision block. 
C.  Surveyor's/Engineer's statement (with embossed or wet seal and with original signature on each sheet) shall verify that As-Built drawings reflect the true conditions in the field. 
D.  Contractor's statement (with original signature on each sheet) shall verify that all construction specifications and product qualities have been met or exceeded. 
E.  "AS-BUILT" shall be labeled on each sheet in 1-inch high letters. 
F.  Street names shall be on all streets. 
G.  If the utility system is to be private (not to be dedicated to local authority), then so state on each sheet. 
H.  The location and elevation of the benchmark referenced will be shown on the drawing. If the referenced benchmark is not within the project, then a complete description of location will be provided for future locating. 

1.2 - WATER SYSTEM AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Locate valves, fittings, services, and fire hydrants in two directions. 
B.  Locations shall be perpendicular to the right-of-way and parallel to the water main. 
4.  Lot lines may be used to locate water services. 
5.  Permanent structures that are properly located may also be used. 
6.  Radial ties are not acceptable. 
C.  All horizontal distances shall be shown to the nearest foot. All vertical distances shall be shown to the nearest tenth of a foot. 
D.  Show all sizes and types of valves and pipes. 
E.  Special detail drawings may be required where installations are not shown on contract drawings for whatever reason or where required for clarity. 
F.  Show location and elevations on pipes and fittings where changes in direction occur. 
G.  Typical water service installation details with deviations from original plans shall be noted on As-Built drawings. 
1.3 - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  All piping, wyes, tees, valves, manholes and special cases shall be located in two directions, in the same manner as water locations. 
B.  Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical dimensions shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot. 
C.  Identify runs of gravity (i.e., 300 feet of 8" PVC SDR 35 at 0.4%). 
D.  Elevations shall be given for the top of all manhole covers and for all inverts. 
E.  Service laterals are to be identified with location of end service or plug (station and offset measured upstream). 
F.  Manholes shall be identified by types. 
1.4 - FORCE MAINS AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Locate all valves, fittings, etc. in two directions as above. 
B.  Locations of pipe shall be shown at all changes in direction. 
C.  Show all sizes and types of valves, fittings, pipe, etc. 
D.  Special detail drawings will be required where installations were not as shown on original drawings due to field conditions or where required for clarity. 
1.6 - PUMP STATION AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Wetwell size and location shall be shown. 
B.  Elevations for top, bottom, inverts, adjacent ground and type and size of lines and fittings for all lines entering or leaving the wetwell. 
C.  All schedules which show pump, motor and electrical data shall be amended and shall be submitted with wetwell drawings. 
D.  All improvements within the pump station boundaries shall be located horizontally and vertically to the nearest tenth of a foot (i.e., valve pit, pump-out, water spigot, wetwell, control panel, bends, fittings, etc.). 
1.7 - DRAINAGE SYSTEM AS-BUILT REQUIREMENTS 
A.  All drainage structures shall be located by plus and tie from right-of-way line. 
B.  Provide elevations for all drainage structures, top, invert, bottom, etc. 
C.  Identify size, material, and slope of all piping. 
D.  Provide spot elevations and cross sectional information, as well as slope, on all ditches, canals, etc. 
E.  Show all drainage easements and encroachments to those easements on the As-Built drawings. 
F.  "As-Built" information required on storm water basins shall consist of: 
1.  Spot elevation on top of bank to confirm minimum design bank elevation; 
2.  Elevation of water stage at date of As-Built; 
3.  Elevation of top of control structure, throat, faces, or under drain; 
4.  Location of top of bank and existing water edges at time and date of taking elevations; 
5.  Spot elevation on the bottom of lake if dry or requested by the City Engineer. 
END OF SECTION IX  AS-BUILT CHECKLIST 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1968 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1968 Code, as updated through October 25, 1993, which are included herein. Sections of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1968 Code, as updated through October 25, 1993, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1968 Code. Ordinances adopted since October 25, 1993, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 