CODE OF ORDINANCES COUNTY OF PIERCE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

COUNTY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Neal Bennett 
Chairman 
____________ 
Harold Rozier, Commissioner 
Mike Streat, Commissioner 
Randy Dixon, Commissioner 
Lanier Walker, Commissioner 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Jason Rubenbauer 
County Manager 
____________ 
Franklin Rozier 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Amy Hitt 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the County of Pierce, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2005 Code, as supplemented through January 3, 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2005 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Sweeney, Code Attorney, and Amanda Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jason Rubenbauer, County Manager, Neal Bennett, Chairman of the Board of Commissioners and Amy Hitt, County Clerk for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the County readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the County's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Pierce, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Pierce, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Pierce, Georgia. 2018. 
PART I - SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, CLERK, COUNTY ATTORNEY, COUNTY MANAGER, AUDIT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 420), page 1397. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the term "commissioners of roads and revenues" has been changed to "board of commissioners" and the terms "commissioner of roads and revenues" has been changed to "commissioner." 

Sec. 1. - Creation of board. 
(a)  There is created the board of commissioners of Pierce County. The board shall be composed of five members to be elected as provided in this section. For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Pierce County is divided into four commissioner districts. The four commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: piercep2r Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Pierce Co. 
(b)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Pierce County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Pierce County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  There shall be one member of the board elected by the voters of the entire county who shall be the chairman. Any person desiring to qualify as a candidate for chairman shall designate that he is qualifying for the chairman post. A candidate for chairman may reside anywhere in Pierce County. Any person qualifying for the chairman post shall not be permitted to qualify as a candidate for election to the board from any education district as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  There shall be one member of the board elected from each commissioner district. Any person qualifying as a candidate shall designate the commissioner district for which he desires to qualify. A person may not offer as a candidate for election to the board from any commissioner district other than from the commissioner district in which he is a legal resident. The members of the board of commissioners elected pursuant to this subsection shall be elected by the voters residing within the commissioner district in which such member has offered as a candidate. 
(e)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, as they exist immediately prior to June 1, 2002, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after June 1, 2002, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Act. Those members of the board of commissioners of Pierce County who are serving as such on June 1, 2002, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(f)  The members of the board of commissioners of Pierce County provided for in this section shall be elected at the general election of 1986 and shall take office on January 1, 1987. Members elected from Commissioner District No. 1 and Commissioner District No. 3 shall be elected for terms of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Members elected from Commissioner District No. 2 and Commissioner District No. 4 and the member elected as chairman shall be elected for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. All members of said board shall be nominated and elected in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code.' 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 478), page 4836, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 211), page 4235; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 4132, § 1) 
Editor's note— The plan referenced in subsection (a) (Plan Name: piercep2r Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Pierce Co.) has been omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor. It may be found at 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 4132. 
Sec. 2. - Repealed. 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 478), page 4836, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Vacancies. 
Any vacancy on the board shall be filled at a special election called by the ordinary of said county and held within 30 days after such vacancy occurs. All laws, rules and regulations governing regular county elections shall govern all regular and special elections held under this Act. The member elected to fill any vacancy shall serve only for the unexpired term of the commissioner whose office has become vacant. Should there be a vacancy in the office of chairperson, the members of the board may elect one of such members to act as chairperson until such time that the vacancy shall be filled by special election. The board may provide additional compensation for the acting chairperson. Such compensation shall not exceed the regular compensation provided for the chairperson. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4189, § 1) 
Sec. 4. - Eligibility. 
No person shall be eligible to hold office as a commissioner who is not a registered qualified voter of the county, and only such persons as are registered and qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly shall be allowed to participate in any election for county commissioners. 
Sec. 5. - Bond of chairman and other commissioners. 
The commissioner named as chairman of the board shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, give bond with a surety company licensed to do business in this state, approved by the ordinary of said county, in the sum of $10,000.00, payable to the ordinary of the county and his successors in office, and conditioned for the faithful discharge by said chairman of his duties and the carrying out of the conditions thereof. 
Each of the other commissioners shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of such office, give bond with a security company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the judge of the probate court of said county in the sum of $5,000.00 payable to the judge of the Probate Court of Pierce County and his or her successors in office and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the county commissioners. The premiums of the security bond provided for in this section shall be paid by Pierce County out of the county's treasury. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4189, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Official oath. 
Each of said commissioners shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, make and subscribe to an oath before the ordinary of the county to faithfully discharge his duties and to carry out the provisions of this Act, to the best of his skill and knowledge, and to the best interest of the county. 
Sec. 7. - Chairman's compensation and expenses. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall serve on a part-time basis and shall receive a salary in the amount of $18,000.00. The chairperson shall receive an expense allowance to be determined by the board in its annual budget and payable in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Pierce County. The chairperson shall be entitled to travel and lodging expenses for travel outside of Pierce County in performance of his or her official duties. The chairperson shall receive a mileage allowance for travel at the rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 96), page 1098, § 1; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 282), page 2961, § 1; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 362), page 3331, § 1; 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 419), page 3132; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 40), page 2115, § 1; 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 68), page 206, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 853), page 2649; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 335), page 2888, § 1; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 795), page 2086, § 1; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 188), page 4024, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4189, § 3; 2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 600), page 4210; 2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 3894, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - Compensation and expenses of other members. 
The compensation of each of the members of the board other than the chairperson shall be not more than $6,000.00 annually, the exact amount to be determined by the majority vote of the board of commissioners of Pierce County and paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Pierce County. The members of the board other than the chairperson shall receive an expense allowance as approved by the board in its annual budget and payable in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Pierce County. The members other than the chairperson shall be entitled to travel and lodging expenses for travel outside of Pierce County while performing their official duties. Such members shall be paid a mileage allowance for travel at the rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 282), page 2961, § 2; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 362), page 3331, § 2; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 40), page 2115, § 2; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 68), page 2068, § 2; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 188), page 4024, § 2; 1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 233), page 4620; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4189, § 4) 
Sec. 9. - Clerk's duties and salary. 
The board is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint a clerk for said board who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The board shall have the authority to fix the salary of said clerk. It shall be the duty of said clerk to keep a proper and accurate book of said minutes, wherein shall appear all orders, resolutions and proceedings had and passed with reference to county matters. The clerk shall also keep a full and accurate book of county vouchers wherein shall appear in itemized detail all orders and warrants drawn by the board of the county treasurer or depository showing for what purposes and on what fund such orders or warrants were drawn. He shall also in a well bound book keep an inventory of all county property of whatever nature, listing the valuation of each item of property so recorded, where located, in whose custody, and in what condition, which inventory shall be carefully revised each year, and he shall keep such other books and records as the board may require, all of which shall be open to public inspection during the office hours by any citizen or taxpayer of the county. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 4), page 949; 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 36), page 548; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 282), page 2961, § 3; 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 362), page 3331, § 3; 1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 40), page 2115, § 3) 
Sec. 10. - Meetings; concurrence; election of chairman. 
The board shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday in each month, and at such other times as said board may fix, for the transaction of the business of the county. Three members of said board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chairman may vote on all questions before the board and the vote of each commissioner shall have equal weight and dignity as that of the chairman or any other member. A majority of the board present at a meeting must concur in order to pass any order or resolution or let any contract or grant or allow any claim against the county, and their acts on all such matters must be duly entered on the minutes of the board in order to be valid. 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 478), page 4836, § 2) 
Sec. 11. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
The Board of Commissioners shall have and they are hereby vested with exclusive jurisdiction and control over the following matters, to wit: In directing, controlling and caring for all property of the county, according to law; in levying taxes for county purposes, according to law, in establishing, altering or abolishing public roads, private ways, bridges and ferries in conformity to law; in establishing, abolishing or changing election precincts and Militia Districts, according to law; in supervising the tax collector's and tax receiver's books and in allowing the insolvent list for said county, according to law; in examining, settling and allowing all claims against the county; in examining and auditing all claims and accounts of officers having the care, management, keeping, collection or disbursement of money belonging to the county or appropriated for its use and benefit and bringing them to a settlement, and especially are they charged with frequently examining and auditing the books of the county treasurer or county depository, the tax collector, the tax receiver, the sheriff, the superintendent of public schools, and other officers of said county, through whose hands county funds may pass, and this may be done by any member of the board or through accountants or bookkeepers employed for the purpose, and he or they may require from all such officers, subject to examination, such reports as may be necessary to keep said commissioner fully informed at all times of the financial condition of the county; in controlling, calling for and managing the convicts of the county, according to law; in making rules, regulations and provisions for the support of the poor of the county, according to law; in promoting and preserving the public health of the county, with authority to quarantine against contagious diseases and epidemics, according to law; in regulating and fixing license fees as authorized by law; in providing for the levy and collection of the commutation road taxes, fixing the amount to be paid in money or the number of days' work to be performed in lieu thereof; in trying all road defaulters, in accordance with the law, and generally to have and exercise all powers heretofore vested in the ordinary of said county when sitting for county purposes and to exercise such other powers as are granted by law, or as may be indispensable to the jurisdiction over county matters or county finances; in selecting and appointing all minor officers of the county whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided by law, such as superintendent and guards of convicts in the chain gang, janitor of the courthouse, county physician and health officer, tax assessors, county policemen, and other officers and guards as needed and authorized by law. All appointees of the board shall be subject to suspension or dismissal at any time, and no appointee so suspended or dismissed shall be entitled to any salary or compensation during suspension or after dismissal, no matter whether the time for which he was appointed has expired or not. 
Sec. 12. - County attorney. 
The board shall have authority to employ a competent attorney at law as county attorney to advise them and represent the county in any litigation which may arise in which said county is a party. Said attorney may be retained only in an advisory capacity, and in the event of litigation, the board may make such agreement with said attorney, or any other attorney, for legal representation, as they may deem advisable. Whenever it is deemed necessary, the board may employ additional counsel to assist the county attorney. The board is hereby authorized to employ such other help as they may deem necessary and also a Warden for the county at a salary not to exceed $150.00 per month together with an allowance of $50.00 per month in addition to said salary for the use of the Warden's automobile and to pay such other expenses and to furnish said Warden with materials, parts and gasoline as they may deem necessary in the discharge of his duties. 
(1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 96), page 1098, § 3) 
Sec. 13. - County manager; creation and duties. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code Section 36-5-22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22], there is created the office of county manager for Pierce County. The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the county government. The county manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all county departments. 
(b)  The county manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners of Pierce County who shall determine and prescribe his or her compensation and term of office. Said board of commissioners may contract with the county manager on such terms as it may deem reasonable and prudent. No member of the board of commissioners shall be appointed county manager on either a permanent or interim basis during the term of office for which he or she is elected or for a period of one year after terminating his or her office as a commissioner of Pierce County. 
(c)  The county manager shall devote all of his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the county and shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the efficient administration of all of the affairs of the county over which the county manager has jurisdiction. The powers and duties of the county manager shall be: 
(1)  To see that all laws, county codes, and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  To appoint all department heads with the approval of the board of commissioners; 
(3)  To appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees in all departments; 
(4)  To exercise control over all departments and divisions created therein or which may hereafter be created by the board of commissioners; 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the board of commissioners with the right to take part in all discussions but having no vote; 
(6)  To recommend to the board of commissioners such measures for adoption which he or she may deem necessary and expedient; 
(7)  To prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget; 
(8)  To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county; 
(9)  To supervise and direct the official conduct of all county officers and employees except as otherwise provided in this Act; 
(10)  To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the county, to make all purchases of materials and supplies for the county, and to see that the same are received as contracted for; and 
(11)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed in this Act or required of the county manager by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of county manager, the board of commissioners shall expeditiously proceed with due diligence to appoint an interim county manager. In no such event shall the board of commissioners allow the office of county manager to remain vacant for a period in excess of four weeks from the date said office became vacant. Specifically, the board of commissioners shall, at the least, fill any vacancy in the office of county manager with an interim county manager within four weeks from the date of vacancy. Furthermore, the board of commissioners shall advertise for the permanent position of county manager at the first opportunity upon vacancy of the office of county manager. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4189, § 5; 2010 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 3894, § 2) 
Sec. 14. - Chairman's duties. 
The chairman of the board shall, at the end of each quarter, with the aid and assistance of the clerk of the board, make up a condensed statement showing all amounts collected and expended on behalf of the county during that quarter, the balance on hand at the beginning of the quarter and at the end of the quarter, and shall verify said statement by an affidavit that the statement is a full and true statement of the monetary transactions of the board of commissioners for the preceding quarter, said statement shall be published either in the official organ of the county, or by posting upon the bulletin board in the rotunda of the courthouse. 
Sec. 15. - Financial interest unlawful; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for the board of commissioners, or any member thereof, or the chairman, to have any financial interest in the sale or purchase of any articles to or from the county, or to receive any rebate, expense account, transportation, or other valuable consideration in connection with or through the purchase of any equipment or supplies for the county, or the awarding of any contract for said county, and if any commissioner shall violate any provision of this section he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for such in the manner prescribed by law, and he shall immediately forfeit his office, and such conviction shall create a vacancy in said office, which said vacancy shall be filled as provided in section 3 of this Act. The chairman of the county commissioners is hereby given authority, in the event of an emergency, to purchase supplies for the county in an amount not to exceed $500.00. 
Sec. 16. - Purchase of materials. 
No material for public building, bridges or roads shall be purchased by said board, for the county, except upon written specifications as to quality, and all such material must be suitable for the purpose intended and of good quality and generally recognized as standard for the purpose to be used. Metal culverts shall be bought according to size and gauge and such as recognized by the State Highway Department and the United States road building authorities as standard for road purposes. All laws of Georgia as to competitive bidding for all such material shall be strictly observed. 
Sec. 17. - Audit. 
The board of commissioners of Pierce County is hereby given authority to employ in its discretion an auditor to audit all books, accounts, vouchers, warrants, and other records of the board. 
Sec. 18. - Severability. 
Should any section, provision, clause, or any other part of this Act be held unconstitutional and invalid, it shall not affect or destroy the validity or constitutionality of any other section, provision, clause or part of this Act which is in and of itself unconstitutional or invalid, and the remaining portions of this Act shall be enforced without regard to the section, provision, clause or part so held to be invalid. 
Sec. 19. - General repeal. 
All laws or parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY TREASURER ABOLISHED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 177), page 327, which created and established the board of commissioners of the county. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Office abolished. 
Be it enacted by the general assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of same, that the office of county treasurer of the County of Pierce is hereby abolished, said office to be abolished and this Act to go into effect on January 1, 1917. 
Sec. 2. - Bank depository. 
Be it further enacted, that the county commissioners of the County of Pierce are hereby authorized and directed to select any bank in the County of Pierce to do and to perform all the duties and functions of the office of county treasurer of said county, and said bank thus selected shall do all of said work without any compensation or pay, either directly or indirectly. 
Sec. 3. - Bond. 
Be it further enacted, that the bank thus selected shall give a good bond to the county commissioners of said county in the sum of $20,000.00 for the faithful performance of all its duties connected with the county business. The board of commissioners of Pierce County, or any other official or board which may be hereafter in charge of said county's fiscal affairs, may, in his or their discretion, accept from the county depository of Pierce County, designated as provided by law, a bond with personal sureties instead of a surety company bond, or, if said official or board thinks proper to do so, he or they may accept from said county depository a surety-company bond for a part of the amount of the bond required and a bond with personal sureties for the remainder of said amount, the latter bond to protect the county from additional losses in excess of the amount covered by the surety-company bond. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 140), page 646, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Deposit of revenue. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all moneys collected for the county, including all tax moneys, shall be deposited by the county officers of Pierce County in said county depository as required by law. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 140), page 646, § 3) 
Sec. 5. - General repeal. 
Be it further enacted, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE III. - PROBATE COURT 
DIVISION 1. - COMPENSATION OF JUDGE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 200), page 2492. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. Pursuant to Ga. Const. (1976) art. VI, § VI, ¶ IV, terms such as ordinary or court of ordinary are changed to judge of the probate court and probate court, respectively. 

Sec. 1. - Prior fee system abolished. 
The present mode of compensating the judge of probate court of Pierce County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 2. - Annual salary. 
The judge of probate court shall receive an annual salary of $6,000.00, payable in equal monthly installments from county funds. 
Sec. 3. - Duties 
After the effective date of this Act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the probate court shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Sec. 4. - Appointment of clerks and personnel. 
The judge of probate court shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to efficiently and effectively discharge the official duties of his office. He shall, from time to time, recommend to the governing authority of said county the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of said county to fix the compensation to be received by each employee in said office. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the judge of probate court, during his term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
Sec. 5. - County funding. 
The necessary operating expenses of the judge's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, uniforms, vehicles and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Pierce County. 
Sec. 6. - Referendum. 
It shall be the duty of the judge of probate court of Pierce County to issue the call for an election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the voters of said County for approval or rejection. The judge of probate court shall set the date of such election for Tuesday, November 7, 1972. The judge of probate court shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof, in the official organ of Pierce County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"YES () NO () 
Shall the Act placing the judge of probate court of Pierce County on a salary of $6,000.00 per year in lieu of the fee system of compensation and providing for the appointment of deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel with the approval of the Board of Commissioners of Pierce County, be approved?" 
All persons desiring to vote in favor of the Act shall vote "Yes", and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No". If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. The expense of such election shall be borne by Pierce County. It shall be the duty of the judge of probate court to hold and conduct such election. He shall hold such election under the same laws and rules and regulations as govern special elections, except as otherwise provided herein. It shall be the duty of the judge of probate court to canvass the returns and declare and certify the result of the election. It shall be his further duty to certify the result thereof to the secretary of state. 
Section 7. - General repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTION OF PROBATE JUDGE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 203), page 4206. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Judge shall first be elected. 
The judge of the probate court of Pierce County shall be elected by the qualified voters of Pierce County in a nonpartisan primary and election. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the judge of the probate court shall be elected pursuant to the general elections laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 2. - Term. 
Beginning with the election held in 1996 and every four years thereafter, the judge of the probate court shall be elected at the nonpartisan primary and general election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of office of the judge of the probate court, and shall take office on January 1 immediately following such election for a term of four years and until such judge's successor is elected and qualified. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess.)(Act No. EX7), page 233) 
Sec. 3. - Candidates nominated. 
Candidates for the office of judge of the probate court shall be nominated in a nonpartisan primary to be held at the same time as and in conjunction with the general primary every four years. A nominating petition shall not be required to place the name of any such candidate on the primary ballot. A candidate may have his or her name placed on the primary ballot by filing a notice of candidacy with the county election superintendent and by paying the qualifying fee. 
Sec. 4. - Generally election. 
The candidate receiving a majority of votes in the nonpartisan primary shall be the nominee for the office of judge of the probate court and shall be the only candidate for such office to have his or her name appear on the general election ballot. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office shall be in a runoff to be held on the same day as a runoff from the general primary, as provided by state law, to determine which candidate will be on the general election ballot. 
Sec. 5. - Nonpartisan election. 
The names of all candidates for the office of judge of the probate court shall appear in a separate section of each primary and general election ballot of each elector. No party designation or affiliation shall appear beside the name of any such candidate on any primary or general election ballot, and no candidate for the office of judge of the probate court shall be nominated by any political party. 
Sec. 6. - Statutory authority. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to the authority of Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-139]. 
Sec. 7. - General appeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHIEF MAGISTRATE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 205), page 4211 which established nonpartisan primaries and elections for the chief magistrate. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Elected by voters. 
The chief magistrate of the magistrate court of Pierce County shall be elected by the qualified voters of Pierce County in a nonpartisan primary and election. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the chief magistrate of the magistrate court shall be elected pursuant to the general elections laws of Georgia. 
Sec. 2. - Term. 
Beginning with the election held in 1996 and every four years thereafter, the chief magistrate of the magistrate court shall be elected at the nonpartisan primary and general election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of office of the chief magistrate of the magistrate court, and shall take office on January 1 immediately following such election for a term of four years and until such chief magistrate's successor is elected and qualified. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess.)(Act No. EX 7), page 234) 
Sec. 3. - Nominations of candidates during primary. 
Candidates for the office of chief magistrate of the magistrate court shall be nominated in a nonpartisan primary to be held at the same time as and in conjunction with the general primary every four years. A nominating petition shall not be required to place the name of any such candidate on the primary ballot. A candidate may have his or her name placed on the primary ballot by filing a notice of candidacy with the county election superintendent and by paying the qualifying fee. 
Sec. 4. - General Election. 
The candidate receiving a majority of votes in the nonpartisan primary shall be the nominee for the office of chief magistrate of the magistrate court and shall be the only candidate for such office to have his or her name appear on the general election ballot. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office shall be in a runoff to be held on the same day as a runoff from the general primary, as provided by state law, to determine which candidate will be on the general election ballot. 
Sec. 5. - Nonpartisan election. 
The names of all candidates for the office of chief magistrate of the magistrate court shall appear in a separate section of each primary and general election ballot of each elector. No party designation or affiliation shall appear beside the name of any such candidate on any primary or general election ballot, and no candidate for the office of chief magistrate of the magistrate court shall be nominated by any political party. 
Sec. 6. - Statutory authority. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to the authority of Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-139]. 
Sec. 7. - General repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE V. - SHERIFF[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 28), page 2071. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Prior fee system abolished. 
The present method of compensating the sheriff of Pierce County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished and, in lieu thereof, the sheriff shall receive an annual salary as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 2. - Compensation as provided by law. 
The compensation and allowances of the sheriff of Pierce County shall be as now or hereafter provided by law. In addition to the compensation and allowances provided by law, the governing authority of Pierce County is authorized to provide from county funds a supplement to the compensation of the sheriff of Pierce County, the exact amount of said supplement to be fixed by the governing authority and paid in equal monthly installments." 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 2570, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 201), page 2496, § 1; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 792), page 2077, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Collection of fees. 
After the effective date of this Act, the sheriff shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies, and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies, and shall pay the same to the county fiscal authority on or before the tenth day of each month following the month in which they were collected and received. At the time of each such monthly payment, the sheriff shall also furnish the county fiscal authority a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Sec. 4. - Personnel. 
The sheriff shall have the authority to recommend to the governing authority of Pierce County the number of deputies and clerical personnel necessary for the operation of the sheriff's office and their compensation. The sheriff shall be empowered to employ the number of deputies and clerical personnel approved by the governing authority and to compensate them as provided by said governing authority. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his term of office, to designate and name the persons who shall be employed, to prescribe their duties and assignments and to remove or replace such deputies and clerical personnel at will and within his sole discretion. 
Sec. 4A. - Vehicles and equipment. 
The sheriff shall recommend to the governing authority of Pierce County the number of vehicles and equipment necessary for the operation of the sheriff's office. The necessary vehicles and equipment shall be determined by the governing authority and shall be paid for with funds of Pierce County available for such purpose. 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 193), page 2570, § 2; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 884), page 2739; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 201), page 2496, § 2; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 792), page 2077, § 2) 
Sec. 5. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the sheriff's office, expressly including the compensation of the sheriff, his full-time deputy, extra deputies, and clerical personnel, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, radio equipment, and the repair, replacement, and maintenance thereof as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. 
Sec. 6. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Act shall become effective March 1, 1965. 
Sec. 7. - General repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4143. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Creation. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)], there is created the board of elections and registration of Pierce County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the superintendent of elections of Pierce County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," currently being exercised by the judge of the Probate Court of Pierce County, and the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the board of registrars of Pierce County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Code Section 21-2-2 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-2] unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act; the term "commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Pierce County; and "county" means Pierce County. 
Sec. 3. - Composition. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of the county and who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. Two members of the board shall be appointed by the political party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. Each of these respective members appointed by political parties shall be nominated by the party chairperson and ratified by the county executive committee of the respective political party at least 30 days before the beginning of the term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in the office. In the event that a political party entitled to appoint a member of the board does not have a county executive committee, such appointment shall be made by the state executive committee of such political party. 
(c)  The fifth member shall be selected by the four members of the board appointed by the political parties. In the event that the four members appointed by the political parties cannot agree on a fifth member within 30 days after taking office, such members shall submit to the chief judge of the superior court of Pierce County a list of not more than four names of persons eligible for such position, and the chief judge shall select the fifth member from such list based upon the information and qualifications of each candidate submitted by the four members appointed by the political parties. 
(d)  All appointments to the board shall be promptly certified to the clerk of the superior court of Pierce County. 
(e)  In making the initial appointments to the board, the four members appointed by the political parties shall be selected by political parties not later than June 1, 2009. Each political party shall designate one of its appointees to serve a term beginning on July 1, 2009, and ending on June 30, 2011, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Successors to such members shall thereafter be appointed to serve terms of office of four years beginning July 1, 2011, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The other appointees of each political party shall serve terms beginning on July 1, 2009, and ending on June 30, 2013, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Successors to such members shall thereafter be appointed to serve terms of office of four years beginning July 1, 2013, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
(f)  The fifth member shall be selected by the four members appointed by the parties no later than 30 days after such four members take office, and such fifth member shall serve from the date of his or her appointment until June 30, 2011, and until his or her successor is duly appointed and qualified. Successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial appointment for a term of office of four years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(g)  At its first meeting in each odd-numbered year, the board shall elect from its members a chairperson. 
Sec. 4. - Qualifications. 
(a)  No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(b)  Members of the board shall be residents of Pierce County and shall have been registered voters in Pierce County for a period of at least one year prior to the date of their appointment to the board. 
(c)  No member of the board shall be related by blood or marriage closer than first cousins to any elected official in Pierce County nor shall any member of the board be an agent, an appointed official, or employee of, or work directly for, any agency of state government, Pierce County, or any municipality for which the board conducts municipal elections. 
Sec. 5. - Certification of appointment. 
The appointing authorities shall certify the appointment of each member by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each such certification on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the secretary of state and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Term limit; resignation and removal. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve two full terms of office, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing authority and to the clerk of the superior court, and shall be subject to removal from the board by the appointing authority at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing. 
Sec. 7. - Interim appointments. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any appointed member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the original appointing authority shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in section 3 of this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 8. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 9. - Procedural rules, meeting minutes 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections, and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as is practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings and shall meet not fewer than three times per year. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any three members of the board. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
Sec. 10. - Contract authority 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Pierce County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 11. - Election supervisor. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to appoint an election supervisor to generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The election supervisor shall not be a member of the board and shall not be an elected public official or an officer of a political party or body. The election supervisor may be a part-time employee. 
(b)  The board shall be authorized to employ additional clerical assistants as needed to carry out the duties and functions of the board. 
Sec. 12. - Compensation of board members and employees. 
Compensation for the members of the board, election supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the board of commissioners of Pierce County. Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 13. - Office space, equipment and clerical assistance. 
The board of commissioners of Pierce County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the board of commissioners of Pierce County deems appropriate. 
Sec. 14. - Approval required. 
The board of commissioners of Pierce County shall through its legal counsel cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
Sec. 15. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective on July 1, 2009. Upon this Act becoming fully effective, the judge of the probate court of Pierce County and the board of registrars of Pierce County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. On such date, the board of registrars of Pierce County shall be abolished. 
Sec. 16. - General repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE VII. - PIERCE COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING AUTHORITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is (1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 44), page 683; being an amendment to Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, which constitutional amendment was continued by 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 131), page 3786. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Constitution amended. 
Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
A.  Created. There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the 'Pierce County Industrial Development and Building Authority', which shall be an instrumentality of Pierce County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the 'Authority'. 
B.  Constitution. The authority shall consist of seven members who shall be eligible for reappointment. The board of commissioners of roads and revenues of Pierce County shall appoint five members of the authority, as follows: One member for five years, two members for four years, one member for three years, and one member for two years. The mayor and council of the City of Blackshear shall appoint one member for five years. The mayor and council of the City of Patterson shall appoint one member for five years. All members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter all members shall be appointed for terms of five years each and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled in the same manner as regular appointments. The majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and the majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. 
C.  Election of chairman, compensation, etc. The members of the authority shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman, and shall also elect a secretary and treasurer or a secretary-treasurer. The members shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make by-laws and regulations for its government and may delegate to one or more of its members or its officers, agents, and employees such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. The authority shall have perpetual existence as hereinafter provided. 
D.  Tax exempt. The property obligations and the interest obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property obligations and interest on the obligations of Pierce County. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the authority. 
E.  Definitions. As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The word 'authority' shall mean the 'Pierce County Industrial Development and Building Authority', created hereby. 
(2)  The word 'project' shall be deemed to mean and include property, real or personal, acquired or held by the authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Pierce County, or any combination thereof, the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; or the construction, installation or expansion of one or more buildings, plants, or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations or associations for such purposes. 
(3)  The term 'cost of project' shall embrace: the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired or contracted for; the cost of financing charges or interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal or legal expenses; cost of plans or specifications; or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction or improvements, or to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, or the acquisition, construction, equipping or operating of any project or any part thereof. 
F.  Powers. The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this amendment, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To sue and be used; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority, any of which contracts may be made with Pierce County or may be made with any one or more municipal corporations in Pierce County. Pierce County and all municipal corporations located therein are hereby authorized to enter into contracts with the authority; 
(4)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of any property and to administer trusts; 
(5)  To acquire by purchase, gift or construction of any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(6)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of, or grant options for any such purposes, any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(7)  To mortgage, pledge, or assign any revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees received by the authority; 
(8)  To issue bonds for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the purpose of the authority; 
(9)  To appoint officers and retain agents, engineers, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants and employees and to provide their compensation and duties; 
(10)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue-anticipation bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(11)  To issue revenue-anticipation bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued. Such revenue-anticipation bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, pp. 761-774), as amended [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-30 et seq.], providing for the issuance of revenue-anticipation bonds. As security for the payment of any revenue-anticipation bonds so authorized, any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered and the authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture containing any provisions not in conflict with law for the security of such bonds, which trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or upon default in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture. The State of Georgia in behalf of the State and Pierce County and each municipal corporation located therein hereby waives any right the state, Pierce County or any municipal corporation located therein may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof. For purposes of the aforesaid judicial validation, the authority shall be regarded as being located in Pierce County, and the superior court of Pierce County shall have jurisdiction and the requisite notices shall be published in Pierce County. If no exception is filed to the decree validating such bonds within 20 days from the date upon which such decree is entered, such decree shall be final and no appeal may be taken therefrom; 
(12)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this amendment. 
G.  Tax. The governing authority of Pierce County is hereby authorized to levy an annual ad valorem tax, not to exceed two mills, on all taxable property within Pierce County for the support of the authority and for its use and purposes. All funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by the governing authority of Pierce County to the authority and when paid to the authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by the authority for any of its purposes and powers as herein stated or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law. 
H.  Sovereign immunity. The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia when in the performance of their public duties of work of the state. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. 
I.  Exemptions. The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income, or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged, or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
J.  Public purpose. This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding the public good and welfare and industry and trade within the territorial limits of Pierce County and reduce unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
K.  Powers. The general assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The general assembly may also provide by law for the continuation of the authority in the event Pierce County is consolidated or merged with any other county or counties. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within Pierce County. The general assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of Pierce County. 
L.  Debt. There shall be no limitation upon the amount of debt which the authority may incur. But no debt created by the authority shall be a debt of the State of Georgia, Pierce County, or any municipal corporation located in Pierce County. 
M.  Dissolution. Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Pierce County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
N.  Effective. This amendment shall be self-executing and effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within 30 days after such proclamation. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR COUNTY PURPOSES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is (2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 885), page 4597). Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Exemption enacted. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Pierce County, including but not limited to any ad valorem taxes for special district purposes and to pay interest on and to retire county bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this Act is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40], with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than five contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(b)  Each resident of Pierce County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Pierce County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of the homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such removal and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Pierce County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The tax commissioner of Pierce County shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1]. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of the county or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to county ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2001. 
Sec. 2. - Referendum required. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Pierce County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Pierce County for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the July, 2000, state-wide general primary, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Pierce County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES ( ) NO 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from certain Pierce County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the assessed value of a homestead for the current year exceeds the base year assessed value of such homestead?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the 25 votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2001. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. 
The expense of such election shall be borne by Pierce County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the secretary of state. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR SCHOOL DISTRICT TAX[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is (2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 886), page 4601). Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 

Sec. 1. - Exemption enacted. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Pierce County School District, including but not limited to taxes, any ad valorem taxes for special district purposes and to pay interest on and to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this Act is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40], with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence and not more than five contiguous acres of land immediately surrounding such residence. 
(b)  Each resident of the Pierce County School District is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Pierce County School District taxes for educational purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the current year assessed value of that homestead exceeds the base year assessed value of the homestead. This exemption shall not apply to taxes assessed on improvements to the homestead or additional land that is added to the homestead after January 1 of the base year. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the base year assessed value shall be adjusted to reflect such removal and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an application with the tax commissioner of Pierce County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The tax commissioner of Pierce County shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. 48-5-50.1]. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of the county or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to affect state ad valorem taxes, county ad valorem taxes for county purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2001. 
Sec. 2. - Referendum required. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Pierce County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the Pierce County School District for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the July, 2000, state-wide general primary, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Pierce County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES ( ) NO 
Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from certain Pierce County School District taxes for educational purposes in an amount equal to the amount by which the assessed value of a homestead for the current year exceeds the base year assessed value of such homestead?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2001. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by Pierce County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. - Repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX COMMISSIONER[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1987 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 368), page 4849. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Consolidation of offices into tax commissioner. 
The offices of tax receiver and tax collector of Pierce County are consolidated and combined into the one office of tax commissioner of Pierce County. The rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax commissioner, except as otherwise provided in this Act, shall be the same as those imposed upon the tax receivers and tax collectors by the laws of this state. 
Sec. 2. - Election. 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner created in this Act shall be held at the same time as the election of other county officers for Pierce County in 1988. The person so elected shall take office on the first day of January following the election and shall serve until December 31, 1992, and until a successor is duly elected and qualified. All future elections for tax commissioner shall be held at the same time as elections for other county officers, and all future tax commissioners shall take office on the first day of January following their election and shall serve a term of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Nothing in this Act shall affect the terms of office of the present tax collector and tax receiver of Pierce County and their terms of office shall continue through December 31, 1988. Should any vacancy occur in the office of tax commissioner, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of law for filling vacancies in the office of tax collector. 
Sec. 3. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the tax commissioner shall take the oath prescribed by law for tax collectors and shall give bond as provided by law for the tax collector. 
Sec. 4. - Taxes due. 
All taxes due and payable at the time the tax commissioner takes office shall continue to be due and payable until paid. All tax fi. fas. theretofore issued shall have full force and effect and be collectable as issued. 
Sec. 5. - Compensation. 
(a)  The present mode of compensating the tax commissioner of Pierce County, known as the fee system, is abolished and in lieu thereof an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The tax commissioner of Pierce County shall receive an annual salary of not less than the annual salary prescribed in Code Section 48-5-183 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183] and not more than $25,000.00 per annum, the exact amount to be fixed by the governing authority of Pierce County payable in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Pierce County. 
(c)  All fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever kind received and collected by the tax commissioner shall be received, collected, and held as public funds belonging to Pierce County. Once each month the tax commissioner shall turn over to the fiscal authority of said county all funds collected with a detailed, itemized statement showing the sources from which such funds were collected. It is specifically provided that the salary provided herein for the tax commissioner shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever kind, including those commissions allowed by Code Section 48-5-180 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. 48-5-180] which authorizes the payment of commissions on taxes collected in excess of a certain percentage of the taxes due according to the tax net digest. 
(1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1183), page 4923, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Personnel. 
The tax commissioner shall have the authority to employ persons at the discretion of the tax commissioner. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the tax commissioner, during the term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed, to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within the sole discretion of such officer. The governing authority shall have the authority to determine the compensation of persons employed by the tax commissioner. 
Sec. 7. - Compensation of personnel and office supplies and materials. 
(a)  The compensation of all personnel and employees of the tax commissioner shall be in accordance with the personnel policies of Pierce County and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Pierce County. 
(b)  All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, and equipment, and the repair, replacement, and maintenance thereof as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of the office of tax commissioner shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose 
(1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1183), page 4923, § 2) 
Sec. 8. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective January 1, 1989, except that the provisions of section 2, relative to the election of the tax commissioner, shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 9. - Repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a); violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; maximum punishment which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, Pierce County, Georgia," and may be so cited. It may also be referred to as "The Pierce County Code." 
(Code 2005, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, the definitions and rules of construction in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners. 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, which shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
Board, board of commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term means the board of commissioners of the county. 
Code and this Code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are referred to without further qualification, they mean The Code of Ordinances, Pierce County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday provided for in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Pierce County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize him to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Fee, charge, rate, deposit. The term "fee," "charge," "rate" or "deposit" means a fee, charge, rate or deposit set from time to time by the board of commissioners and kept on file in the office of the board. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Land and real estate. The terms "land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the current Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officers, departments, etc. Whenever titles of various officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or other agencies are used, they shall refer to such officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies of the county. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to organizations, associations, clubs, societies, companies, proprietorships, firms, partnerships, either general or limited, joint ventures, trusts, and bodies politic and/or corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether it is privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the term "may" is permissive and discretionary. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future and the past. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2005, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Statutory rules of construction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing provisions of this Code, and other ordinances of the county, as are applied in construing the statutes of the state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1—1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given to words found in the ordinances as are given to similar words found in the statutes of the state. 
(Code 2005, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the sections of this Code and the headings of articles and divisions thereof are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents and shall not be deemed to be titles, nor as any part of the section, article or division, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, articles or divisions, including the catchlines and headings, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 2005, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
(Code 2005, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing on the adoption date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2005, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code, and of codes or other provisions adopted by reference herein, are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code and provisions adopted by reference, nor the application thereof to any persons or circumstances, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation therein of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2005, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any authorized penalty provided by general law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The imposition of a fine, imprisonment or any other penalty authorized by law does not prevent the revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(d)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a fine, imprisonment or other penalty authorized by law does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 2005, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the county; 
(5)  Any ordinance relating to specific public improvements or assessments for such improvements; 
(6)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations; 
(7)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning or to the rezoning of any property; 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to the investment of county funds; 
(9)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, retirement and other matters pertaining to county officers or employees; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to subdivisions or dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county; 
(11)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, closing, prescribing grades, etc., of streets, roads, bridges and other public ways; 
(12)  Any ordinance, consistent with this Code, establishing fees, rates, deposits, service charges or other charges; 
(13)  Any ordinance creating, establishing, prescribing or abolishing urban renewal projects; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones; 
(15)  Any ordinance continuing in force and effect local constitutional amendments; 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution relating to civil defense or emergency management; 
(17)  Any temporary ordinance or special ordinance; 
(18)  The Development Code, Ordinance of 2016 and appendices thereto. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Unlawful alteration of Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner (except by ordinance or other official act of the board of commissioners or the general assembly) which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented. 
(Code 2005, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments; new provisions. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein. A reference to this Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances, Pierce County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances, Pierce County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or division or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows:…." The new section (or division or article or chapter) may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2005, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or parts thereof included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize ordinances and resolutions into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinances incorporated in this Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance or resolution sections inserted in this Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of material included in the supplement or already embodied in this Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 2005, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinance or resolution in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed, nor any right acquired or liability incurred under any ordinance or resolution repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 1-15) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. title 36; open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Consolidated fee schedule. 
The county shall maintain a consolidated fee schedule for permits, licenses and other county fees, charges and costs. Unless otherwise indicated, the amount of any fees, charges and costs imposed by the county, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the county's consolidated fee schedule, shall be established from time to time by action of the board of commissioners, as it deems necessary. A copy of the consolidated fee schedule shall be kept in the office of the county clerk and be made available for public examination during normal working hours. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-21. - County commissioners' meetings. 
The board of commissioners' regularly-scheduled meetings shall be held on the first Tuesday of every month. Unless otherwise noted, all meetings shall be held at 705 College Avenue, Blackshear, Georgia, and shall be open to the public. 
Sec. 2-22. - Appearance before board. 
Anyone wishing to be put on the agenda shall notify the board of commissioners' office by noon of the Wednesday before the regularly-scheduled meeting. They should also state their name, what it is in reference to and any other pertinent information. Anyone addressing the board during a meeting should state their name and the community in which they reside so the minutes can accurately reflect all necessary information. 
Sec. 2-23. - Rules of Order. 
In the event of a question as to order or procedure in the course of business by the board of commissioners, the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall be the authority consulted and observed. 
Secs. 2-24—2-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OTHER BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-50—2-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-72. - Need for authority. 
There is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the county in accordance with the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia passed at the 1963 session and known as the "Industrial Development Authorities Law." 
(Code 2005, § 2-81; Res. of 5-7-1963) 
Sec. 2-73. - Created. 
There shall be in existence an industrial development authority to be known as "The Pierce County Industrial Development and Building Authority," and such authority shall have all the rights, powers and immunity as set forth in the act creating the authority, as passed. 
(Code 2005, § 2-82; Res. of 5-7-1963) 
Secs. 2-74—2-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-105—2-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-122—2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-141. - Department created; purchasing agent. 
A purchasing department shall be created in the board of commissioners' office. The duties of the purchasing agent will be assigned to the existing office staff. The duties of the purchasing agent shall be to ensure that all the steps of the purchasing policies and procedures, as prescribed, are followed and completed; that the prices for items ordered are the best that can be obtained; that the necessary forms and reports are prepared and filed, and such other duties as may be necessary to ensure efficient purchasing practices or responsibilities as may be prescribed by the county manager. 
(Code 2005, § 2-151; Ord. of 2-7-1983) 
Sec. 2-142. - Responsibilities of purchasing agent. 
(a)  All purchases or contracts to purchase supplies or services shall be made by the purchasing agent after prescribed procedures have been followed. No officer or employee of the county shall handle purchasing operations for any materials or services except through the purchasing agent, and no bid shall be honored or awarded if this method is not followed. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing agent to make all purchases except those within prescribed bid limits on the competitive bid basis. 
(Code 2005, § 2-152; Ord. of 2-7-1983) 
Sec. 2-143. - Bid limits. 
(a)  The purchasing procedures prescribed in this division shall be in lieu of procedures set forth in other related ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The bid limit is the dollar amount set for goods and services that can be purchased without a formal bid requirement. 
(b)  The bid limit is $2,500.00 per order. With the bid limits established, the following purchase (bid) policies also apply: 
(1)  Competitive bids will be solicited for all items which exceed the bid limits stated above. 
(2)  The purchasing agent may, without resorting to competitive bids, make purchases of those items the price of which is $2,500.00 or less. Items or services whose purchase price is more than $2,500.00 will be purchased through the competitive bid procedure. 
(Code 2005, § 2-153; Ord. of 2-7-1983) 
Sec. 2-144. - Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, the specifications for goods or services required. The specifications must describe and outline the minimum qualities which products or services must have if they are to meet the acceptable purchase requirements of the county. The potential vendor must meet or exceed the specified requirements in order for his goods or services to be considered for purchase. Specification drawings, industry standards or any other descriptive reference shall be required. Specifications shall be as clear and accurate as possible. 
(2)  Bid deposits or surety may be required for some purchases. When required, the deposits or surety shall be as prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a refund of such deposit or surety. A successful bidder shall have his bid refunded upon successful completion of the contract, but should such successful bidder fail to enter into a contract within the time specified after written notification of the bid award, he shall forfeit any surety deposit made to the county. 
(3)  The county may require a performance bond to be furnished before entering into a bid-based contract. Such performance bond shall be in such amount as shall be found necessary to protect the best interest of the county. 
(4)  With the assistance of various county departments, the purchasing agent may compile and maintain a bidder's list. Vendors desiring to be listed may advise the purchasing agent, in writing, of the following: 
a.  Type of business; 
b.  Names of officers, owners or partners; 
c.  Names of persons authorized to sign bids, offers, contracts and invoices; 
d.  Type of equipment, supplies, and/or materials sold and/or services provided; and 
e.  Name of business, address, phone number and length of time in present business. 
(5)  Additionally, the purchasing agent may use the bidder's list to purchase items within the prescribed bid limits. This will enable the purchasing agent to more readily order those items which are within the bid limits as needed. When this procedure is used, quotations will be obtained from at least three separate vendors by telephone. 
(6)  The county will award bids based upon the recommendation of the purchasing agent. The bids shall be opened in a public place and tabulated. The award will normally be made to the lowest and best responsible bidder. When an award is recommended not to be made or to be made to other than the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons therefor shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and shall be filed along with other papers relating to the transaction. 
(7)  The board of commissioners reserves the right to reject any bid which does not conform to specifications or for other reasons. A formal advertisement shall be made in local area newspapers to ensure every attempt is being made to obtain the lowest price available with quality requirements. Bids must be received within 30 days from the date of the first advertisement. The advertisement shall appear in the local and area newspapers at least two times during that 30-day period. Exceptions will be made to this procedure in those cases where time is of the essence or emergency conditions exist. Bids shall be opened in a public place and properly tabulated, and the successful bidder will be determined. The purchasing agent will then present the bid results to the board of commissioners for final selection of the bid award. Any reason for not awarding the lowest bid must be clearly stated and be a matter of public information. 
(8)  All bids may be rejected when it is in the public interest to do so. In determining the lowest and best responsible vendor, in addition to price, the following will be considered: 
a.  The ability, capacity, and skill of the vendor to perform the contract or provide the materials or services required. 
b.  Whether or not the vendor can perform the contract or provide the materials and services promptly or within the time specified, without delaying or interference. 
c.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgement, experience and efficiency of the vendor. 
d.  The quality of performance of previous contracts, orders, or services. 
e.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the vendor to perform the contract, fill the order or provide the service. 
f.  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplier's contractual services to the particular use required. 
g.  The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  In case of actual emergency, upon notification by the county manager, the purchasing agent may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in work which may vitally affect the life, health, or convenience of citizens of the county. All such emergency purchases must contain a written explanation of the circumstances involved in the emergency and such report will be filed with a copy of the delivery record. 
(Code 2005, § 2-154; Ord. of 2-7-1983) 
Secs. 2-145—2-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-174—2-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM POLICIES 

Sec. 2-200. - County personnel policy manual. 
Unless otherwise addressed in this Code, all county personnel policy shall be as set out in the county's personnel policy manual, which may be amended from time to time by action of the board of commissioners, and which shall be available for examination and copying in the office of human resources during normal business hours. 
Sec. 2-201. - Personnel management system. 
The county personnel management system is a system of employment which recognizes that the county employees covered by the system should be selected and advanced according to their knowledge, skills, and abilities, and that employees who perform satisfactorily should be retained in their positions as long as the position exists, regardless of factors extraneous to their performance and conduct. 
(Code 2005, § 34-31; Res. of 3-7-1988, § 1.100) 
Sec. 2-202. - Establishment. 
Personnel policies have been voluntarily established by the board of commissioners and constitutional officers of the county. The policies are intended to standardize the personnel practices in the various departments where standardization is possible, and to extend certain privileges to the employees of the different departments. In establishing these practices and privileges, the officials are not relinquishing their constitutional authority as appointing authorities, nor are they creating a property interest for employees that leads to the expectancy of continued employment at any time, in any position, pay grade or pay step. The privileges are considered good personnel practices and are consistent with the goals stated in this section. These policies have been established by a resolution adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 34-32; Res. of 3-7-1988, § 1.200) 
Sec. 2-203. - Purpose. 
(a)  Personnel policies have been adopted by the board commissioners and constitutional officers to: 
(1)  Establish uniform benefits and procedures; 
(2)  Ensure equal employment opportunity; and 
(3)  Comply with office of revenue sharing regulations. 
(b)  In a broader sense, the commission and officers of the county want to ensure high morale for the employees of the county, and high productivity for the people of the county. To accomplish those goals, the officials feel that fair and equitable treatment of all applicants and employees is a necessity. Although all jobs are not identical, and, therefore, all conditions of employment will not be identical, many personnel practices can be the same in all departments. Among those practices are the methods of accruing and requesting annual and sick leave, the method of administering disciplinary action, and the methods of administering employee complaints. By including those provisions in the policies, the county officials hope to provide equal benefits to each employee and to ensure good personnel practices. 
(Code 2005, § 34-33; Res. of 3-7-1988, § 1.300) 
Sec. 2-204. - Coverage. 
These policies apply to the covered employees in the departments of participating officials in the county. Participating officials will accept the policies as desirable standard procedures by signature. Federal law recognizes that neither elected officials nor members of their personal staffs should be covered by rules or regulations which imply specific employment practices. Therefore, the elected officials will determine which positions in their departments are policy making or personal staff and will exclude those positions from the classification plan. This practice of identifying covered employees is a voluntary attempt to extend the personnel practices to as many classes of employees as possible. By including certain classes, the officials are not redefining the relationships between themselves and their employees, as defined by the constitution of the state; they are merely extending the personnel practices to as many employees as possible. 
(Code 2005, § 34-34; Res. of 3-7-1988, § 1.400) 
Sec. 2-205. - Administration. 
In general, unless otherwise stated in the county's personnel policy manual, the officials are responsible for administering these policies in their respective departments. The county manager will give administrative support to the departments under constitutional officers, and will administer the policies for departments under the board of commissioners. The chairperson will become directly involved in administering the policies in all departments when budget and funding are concerned and when discipline and hearings are involved. 
(Code 2005, § 34-35; Res. of 3-7-1988, § 1.500) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq. and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq. and 3-6-60 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-40 et seq. and 3-4-80; local government may authorize issuance of license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
County means the area of Pierce County, Georgia, outside the limits of incorporated municipalities. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package store license means a license issued to a retail dealer for the sale of alcoholic beverages, which alcoholic beverages are not to be consumed on the premises of the retail dealer, and which alcoholic beverages are sold in sealed containers. 
Pouring license means a license issued to a retail dealer for the sale of alcoholic beverages, which alcoholic beverages are to be consumed on the premises of the retail dealer, and which alcoholic beverages are served in unsealed containers. 
Retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retail dealer" means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Sheriff means the sheriff or any deputy sheriff of the county. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 6-1; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. I) 
Secs. 4-2—4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-21. - Hours and days of sale. 
No alcoholic beverages will be sold between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night until the hour of 7:00 a.m. on Monday morning, and no alcoholic beverages will be sold on election days, Christmas Day or any other day on which the sale of alcoholic beverages may be prohibited by order of the commissioners. An election day, for the purposes of this article, is hereby defined as that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. The prohibition against the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person on election days shall apply only within the territorial boundaries for which the election is being held, but such territorial boundaries shall not include any property owned or operated by a county, municipality or other political subdivision of the state for airport purposes if no person resides on such publicly-owned or operated property. No alcoholic beverages will be sold between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and until 7:00 a.m. on all other days. Alcoholic beverages may be sold at any time not specifically prohibited under this section. 
(Code 2005, § 6-31; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 7) 
Sec. 4-22. - Pouring license required. 
No retail dealer for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed on his premises unless such dealer has a pouring license. A person who has a package store license but not a pouring license shall be held responsible for such consumption by his customers or other parties. 
(Code 2005, § 6-32; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 8) 
Sec. 4-23. - Copy of ordinance on premises. 
All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall keep a copy of this article on his premises and instruct any person working there with respect to the terms herein, and each licensee and person selling alcoholic beverages shall, at all times, be familiar with the terms of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 6-33; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 9) 
Sec. 4-24. - Inspection. 
The business premises of a holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, including outbuildings, shall be opened to inspection at any and all reasonable times by the sheriff. 
(Code 2005, § 6-34; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 10) 
Sec. 4-25. - Posting of sign required. 
The holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a notice with letters not less than four inches in height, which shall be clearly visible to all customers entering the establishment, as follows: "Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Persons Under 21 Years of Age is Strictly Prohibited." 
(Code 2005, § 6-35; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 11) 
Sec. 4-26. - Employment of persons under 21 years of age. 
No wholesale dealer or retail dealer in alcoholic beverages shall employ or permit the employment of any minor to sell or otherwise handle or deal with alcoholic beverages, except as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
(Code 2005, § 6-36; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 12) 
Sec. 4-27. - Habitual drunkards. 
No wholesale dealer or retail dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is under the influence of any intoxicants or drugs or who is an habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to such dealer. 
(Code 2005, § 6-37; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 13) 
Sec. 4-28. - Consumption in public place with valid pouring license. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed in any public place within the county except where a valid pouring license is in effect. 
(Code 2005, § 6-38; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 14) 
Sec. 4-29. - Violation of chapter. 
In addition to forfeiture of license for violation of any provision of this article, or the failure to abide by this article, all provisions of punishment for violation as set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-9 shall be enforced. 
(Code 2005, § 6-39; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. V, § 4) 
Secs. 4-30—4-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-47. - Application required. 
All applications for licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made in person at the office of the county clerk and shall be accompanied by a completed form furnished for this purpose by such clerk. 
(Code 2005, § 6-51; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 1A) 
Sec. 4-48. - Fingerprints required. 
(a)  At the time any application for a license hereunder is filed at the office of the county clerk and as a prerequisite to the issuance of any license under this article, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints, which shall be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(b)  If the license is to be issued to a firm or corporation, fingerprints shall be supplied by all persons who serve in a supervisory and/or managerial position with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the firm or corporation changes the person in such supervisory and/or managerial positions during any year, and designate such functions to a person who has not previously been responsible for such functions (hereinafter referred to as new person), then such firm or corporation shall notify the county clerk in writing of the change in such supervisory and/or managerial personnel, giving the name of the new person, his address, the effective date of the change and shall furnish the clerk with the fingerprints of the new person. The notification and furnishing of the fingerprints shall be within five regular business days of the commissioners' meeting. Should the fingerprints or investigation of the new person reveal that he is objectionable, the clerk shall notify the licensee immediately. Upon the receipt of such notice, the new person shall not serve in such capacity with licensee until authorized by the commissioners. The licensee may appeal such objections to the commissioners within three days of the receipt of such notice, by delivering written notice of the appeal to the clerk. As soon as possible, the commissioners will hear evidence on such appeal, but the new person shall not serve in such capacity until and unless authorized by the commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 6-52; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 1B) 
Sec. 4-49. - Applicant to be of good moral character; prior convictions. 
All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be of good moral character or such persons' applications shall not be considered; and in no event shall any license be granted to any person, firm or corporation where any of the individuals, or any of the corporate officers, directors or stockholders, as the case may be, have, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or shall have suffered any conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude or involving alcohol control laws of the state or the United States, or of any other state. Should any licensee, partner, officer, director or stockholder of a licensee corporation, after a license has been granted hereunder, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or to a violation of any laws of the United States or of the state relating to alcohol, the licenses issued to such licensee shall stand revoked and cancelled. 
(Code 2005, § 6-53; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 2) 
Sec. 4-50. - Performance bond. 
All applicants for licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall file with such application a personal performance bond in the amount of $1,000.00, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, such bond to ensure compliance with all laws, rules, regulations and resolutions of the county. If the applicant is approved, such bond shall remain in force so long as the license is valid. 
(Code 2005, § 6-54; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 3) 
Sec. 4-51. - Consideration of extenuating circumstances. 
The commissioners, in their sole discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application, or the proposed location of the business. If, in their judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. In addition, the commissioners shall consider the following factors before making any decision of any application: 
(1)  Is there any statutory prohibition of the law of the state against the issuance of such a license to such person at such location? 
(2)  Is the proposed location primarily a residential neighborhood or business neighborhood? 
(3)  Are there schools, churches and numerous dwelling houses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed license site? 
(4)  Are there other such liquor, beer or wine licenses in the immediate neighborhood of the proposed site? 
(5)  Would the issuance of such a license be compatible to the neighborhood as it is now constituted? 
(6)  Would the issuance of such a license in such location tend to diminish the property values of the adjoining lands? 
(Code 2005, § 6-55; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 4) 
Sec. 4-52. - Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, school buildings, or other sites. 
(a)  Prohibited. 
(1)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
a.  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
b.  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application; 
c.  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(b)  Exceptions. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
(1)  Hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding July 1, 1981; 
(2)  Bona fide private clubs, as that term is used in O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1(1); and 
(3)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only, who shall be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges by counties and municipalities. 
(c)  Measurement of distances. For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Code 2005, § 6-56; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 5) 
Sec. 4-53. - False statements. 
The making of any statement of an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. 
(Code 2005, § 6-57; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 6) 
Sec. 4-54. - Fees and taxes. 
No license shall be issued under this article unless the applicant therefor shall have fully paid all license fees and ad valorem taxes due the county. 
(Code 2005, § 6-58; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. II, § 7) 
Sec. 4-55. - Publishing of application. 
Prior to the issuance of any license under this article, a notice of such pending application must be advertised in the official gazette of the county in no less than four issues thereof immediately preceding the week of the next regular meeting of the board, and any interested person shall be afforded the opportunity at such meeting, or any subsequent meeting thereafter at which such application might be considered, to voice any objections to the issuance of such license. Such notice shall be in the form shown on schedule "A," which is incorporated herein by reference and on file in the office of the county clerk, and the costs of publication thereof shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 2005, § 6-59) 
Sec. 4-56. - License required. 
No alcoholic beverage may be sold in the county, except under a license issued in accordance herewith. 
(Code 2005, § 6-60; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 1) 
Sec. 4-57. - Transfer. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, and in the event a licensed business is sold or closed, the licensee must immediately surrender his license to the sheriff. All licenses shall be issued to specific persons, firms, or corporations and for a specific location. 
(Code 2005, § 6-61; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 2) 
Sec. 4-58. - Types of licenses. 
Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be of two types: 
(1)  Package store licenses; and 
(2)  Pouring licenses. 
Package store licenses shall include convenience stores. 
(Code 2005, § 6-62; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 3) 
Sec. 4-59. - Possession of both licenses. 
A retail dealer may obtain both a package store license and a pouring license. However, in order to obtain a pouring license, a retail dealer must first have obtained a package store license; however, no business establishment shall be issued a pouring license where the general public of all ages are permitted to enter. The holding of a package store license does not automatically entitle the holder to a pouring license. 
(Code 2005, § 6-63; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 4) 
Sec. 4-60. - Duration of licenses. 
Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year, and no license fees are to be prorated for a fraction of a year. 
(Code 2005, § 6-64; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 5) 
Sec. 4-61. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
No licensee shall sell alcoholic beverages to any person who is under 21 years of age under state law, and a licensee shall be held responsible for any such sale made by his employees or others in his licensed establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 to have in his possession within the limits of the county any alcoholic beverages, unless such person shall have in his possession such alcoholic beverages as permitted in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(Code 2005, § 6-65; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 6) 
Sec. 4-62. - Compliance required. 
No person shall continue to hold a license issued under this article, if that person has failed to comply with all licensing requirements of the state, as set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 2005, § 6-66; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. III, § 15) 
Sec. 4-63. - Revocation. 
The performance of any act prohibited in this article or the failure to perform any act required hereby, as well as the violation of any law, state or federal, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall constitute grounds for revocation of a license. 
(Code 2005, § 6-67; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. IV, § 1) 
Sec. 4-64. - Temporary suspension and closure of business. 
A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be temporarily suspended and the place of business closed upon receipt of evidence by the commissioners from the sheriff of any violation referred to in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 6-68; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. IV, § 2) 
Sec. 4-65. - Suspension. 
Any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages under this article may be suspended for a definite length of time, revoked, and/or the personal performance bond posted by the licensee forfeited in whole or in part. 
(Code 2005, § 6-69; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. IV, § 3) 
Sec. 4-66. - Notification of revocation; hearing. 
No license shall be revoked and no bond shall be forfeited unless the licensee has been given at least three days' written notice, in person or by registered or certified mail, of the intention of the commissioners to recommend such action. Such notice shall specify the time, place and purposes of the hearing and statement of the charges upon which the commissioners propose to take action. At such hearings conducted by the commissioners, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, and both the commissioners and licensee shall have the right to present evidence relating to the question as to whether or not a violation, as set forth in this article, has occurred, as well as evidence relating to any extenuating or mitigating circumstances. 
(Code 2005, § 6-70; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. IV, § 4) 
Sec. 4-67. - Additional business license. 
The license required under this article shall be required in addition to any license required in the county business license ordinance. 
(Code 2005, § 6-71; Ord. of 3-14-1995, pt. IV, § 5) 
Sec. 4-68. - Fee schedule. 
The license fee for businesses that sell beer, wine and liquor will be determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(Code 2005, § 6-72; Res. of 3-14-1995) 
Secs. 4-69—4-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-95. - Excise taxes imposed. 
The following excise taxes are hereby imposed upon alcoholic beverages sold and distributed to dealers in the county, outside of the corporate limits of the Cities of Blackshear and Patterson: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½; 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(2)  Distilled spirits. $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  Wine. $0.22 per liter of wine and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Code 2005, § 6-91; Ord. of 11-1-1971, § 4) 
Sec. 4-96. - Inspections. 
The retail dealers shall, during regular business hours, permit an inspection of the alcoholic beverages held and possessed by them for resale by any person designated by the board of commissioners for such purpose. 
(Code 2005, § 6-92; Ord. of 11-1-1971, § 7) 
Sec. 4-97. - Violation of article. 
Any violation of this article by any dealer of liquor, wine and/or beer in the county, outside of the limits of the City of Blackshear and the City of Patterson, shall be deemed as sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued to him by the board of commissioners and the refusal thereafter again to issue a new license to such violator of this article. Such action may be taken by the board of commissioners with or without notice to the violator. 
(Code 2005, § 6-93; Ord. of 11-1-1971, § 9) 
Sec. 4-98. - Appointment of inspector. 
The board shall appoint an inspector to make periodic inspections of the places of business of retail dealers in the county, outside of the corporate limits of the City of Blackshear and the City of Patterson, to see that the terms and provisions of this article are carried out by such dealers. His compensation shall be such as may be fixed by the board. Such inspector may be the sheriff or any deputy sheriff. 
(Code 2005, § 6-94; Ord. of 11-1-1971, § 12) 
Sec. 4-99. - Statement of sales; payment of taxes. 
Wholesale dealers shall render to the board of commissioners a true statement of all alcoholic beverages sold to each retail dealer in the county, and shall simultaneously, with such statement, pay to the county the tax imposed under section 4-95. Such statement shall be made by copy of invoices promptly furnished at such times as required by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 6-95; Ord. of 11-1-1971, § 14) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Burial of dead animals on private property. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for the employees of the county, at the request of a citizen of the county, to bury dead animals on the private property of such citizen at the site appointed by the citizen. 
(b)  Prior to the burying of such animal by the county, a fee in an amount determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set forth in the consolidated fee schedule, shall be paid to the county by the citizen requesting the burying of such dead animal. 
(Code 2005, § 10-1; Ord. of 12-2-1991, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 6-2—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-21—6-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-44. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills or seriously injures a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(b) to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division and related laws of the state. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous or vicious dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous or vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height, and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided for in this division and by the laws of the state. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(b)  No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 5. 
(Code 2005, § 10-51; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 6-45. - Control board. 
(a)  An animal control board is hereby created for the purpose of conducting hearings under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23 of the Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(b)  The animal control board shall consist of five persons, who shall serve for staggered terms of three years each. The members of this board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may appoint alternate members of the animal control board from time to time as the need may arise. Such alternate members shall serve only for a temporary time sitting on the board when a quorum of the animal control board cannot be ascertained due to conflicts which exist by appointed board members. 
(Code 2005, § 10-52; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 6-46. - Dog control officer. 
(a)  The dog control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous or vicious dog within the county from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(b)  Should the dog control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous or vicious dog, such officer shall classify such dog accordingly, and the dog control officer shall notify the dog's owner, in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, to the owner's last-known address, of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(Code 2005, § 10-53; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 6-47. - Classification as dangerous or vicious. 
In classifying or reclassifying dangerous or vicious dogs, the dog control officer must comply with the procedure for classification set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23, and the same is incorporated herein as if fully set out in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 10-54; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 6-48. - Requirements for possessing dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(a)  No one shall have or possess within the county a dangerous or vicious dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27, and the provisions thereof are incorporated in this division as if fully set forth in this section. 
(b)  The owner of each dangerous or vicious dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time of the issuance of the annual certificate of registration. The annual registration fee shall be in an amount determined by from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set forth in the consolidated fee schedule for each such dangerous or vicious dog. Registrations shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. 
(c)  The dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or vicious dog is confined or continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is in compliance with or continues to be in compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(b) and (c). 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the county. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog who is a new resident of the county shall register the dog as required by this division and the state's Responsible Dog Ownership Law within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous or vicious dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(g)  The issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the county does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(b) and (c) are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Code 2005, § 10-55; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 5) 
Sec. 6-49. - Confiscation of dogs and the disposition thereof. 
(a)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the dog control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure liability or bond required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by state law and this division; 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(a) and (b). 
(b)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this division shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this division and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., and upon the payment of reasonable cost of confiscation. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this division within 14 days of the date the dog is confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Code 2005, § 10-56; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 6) 
Sec. 6-50. - Interpretation of adoption of this division. 
It is the intention of this division to adopt the minimum standards and requirements for the control of dangerous or vicious dogs in compliance with the state's Responsible Dog Ownership Law. Therefore, as stated by the general assembly of the state, the owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the county or any employee or official of the county which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of such law or this division be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous or vicious dog; or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authority as being a dangerous or vicious dog;, or by a dog that the county has failed to identify as a dangerous or vicious dog; or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous or vicious dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner prescribed by law; or by a dangerous or vicious dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required by law. 
(Code 2005, § 10-57; Ord. of 11-13-1989, § 7) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of taxation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ 1; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; taxation of businesses, professions and occupations in county, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 8-31. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the county. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated area of the county, whether with a location in the county or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the board of commissioners or the sheriff's deputies or to any police officer of the county upon request. 
(Code 2005, § 14-31; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 8-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For words, terms and phrases not defined in this article, they shall, if applicable, be defined by O.C.G.A. sections that address similar subject matter: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee , except as otherwise provided in the second sentence of this definition, means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2. 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who, by state law, requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the local government. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. No local government is authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax as defined in this section. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Code 2005, § 14-32; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 8-33. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule for persons in occupations and professions is set forth in section 8-38. 
(Code 2005, § 14-33; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 8-34. - Occupation tax levied; restriction. 
(a)  Levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county, and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the following criteria: the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate will be based on the number of full-time employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation and will be determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(c)  More than one location. No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(d)  Real estate brokers, agents or companies. No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Code 2005, § 14-34; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 8-35. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the unincorporated part of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 14-35; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 8-36. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the board of commissioners and that line of business being noted by the board of commissioners upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 2005, § 14-36; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 6) 
Sec. 8-37. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax. 
(Code 2005, § 14-37; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 7) 
Sec. 8-38. - Professional practitioners occupation tax election. 
Practitioners of professions, as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (22), shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 8-34. 
(2)  A fee in an amount determined from time to time by the board of county commissioners and set out in the consolidated fee schedule per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to prove information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by December 31 of each year. 
(Code 2005, § 14-38; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 8) 
Sec. 8-39. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2005, § 14-39; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 9) 
Sec. 8-40. - Purpose and scope tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 2005, § 14-40; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 10) 
Sec. 8-41. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration and occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and set out in the consolidated fee schedule. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained 30 days following the commencement of the business and a penalty determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners, and set out in the consolidated fee schedule, imposed. Should any special, occupation or sales tax or license fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax or fee, the person liable for the tax or fee, in addition to any other penalty imposed, shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the board of commissioners. If any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the county any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, in addition to any other penalties provide in this article, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the sheriff may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 2005, § 14-41; Res. of 12-5-1995, §§ 11, 17) 
Sec. 8-42. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate location. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each county location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the county and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has location outside of the county and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Code 2005, § 14-42; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 12) 
Sec. 8-43. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 2005, § 14-43; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 13) 
Sec. 8-44. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2005, § 14-44; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 14) 
Sec. 8-45. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competence, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 2005, § 14-45; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 15) 
Sec. 8-46. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 2005, § 14-46; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 16) 
Sec. 8-47. - Revenue collection officer; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The board of commissioners and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 14-49; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 19) 
Sec. 8-48. - Business not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common or contract carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-116. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 2005, § 14-50; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 20) 
Sec. 8-49. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 2005, § 14-51; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 21) 
Sec. 8-50. - Payment of occupation tax by newly-established businesses. 
(a)  In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid. 
(b)  Businesses commencing after July 1 of any year will only be required to pay 50 percent of the tax otherwise due. This does not apply to the regulatory fees in section 8-38. 
(Code 2005, § 14-53; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 23) 
Sec. 8-51. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Code 2005, § 14-54; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 24) 
Sec. 8-52. - Return confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the county, or any other person to divulge or make known any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerk of the county using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the publication by county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Code 2005, § 14-55; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 25) 
Sec. 8-53. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case, the board of commissioners, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The board of commissioners' officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county, and upon demand of the board of commissioners, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the board of commissioners at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of unreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient/$1.00 will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 2005, § 14-56; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 26) 
Sec. 8-54. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the board of commissioners. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 2005, § 14-57; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 27) 
Sec. 8-55. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the county after the registration for such business has been revoked as above are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and those who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the county request such inspection during business hours for the purpose of determining that the accuracy of the returns herein provided for shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage for the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Code 2005, § 14-58; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 28) 
Sec. 8-56. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the board of commissioners of the county, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the county of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances of the county and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on the date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of the county upon the property of the defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When nulla bona entry has been entered by property authority upon an execution issued by the board of commissioners against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 2005, § 14-59; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 29) 
Sec. 8-57. - Amendment; repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 2005, § 14-60; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 31) 
Sec. 8-58. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 2005, § 14-61; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 31) 
Sec. 8-59. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the board of commissioners and sheriff's department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the board of commissioners, sheriff, members of the sheriff's department, and their assistants to inspect all registration issued by the county, as often as in the judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 2005, § 14-62; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 32) 
Sec. 8-60. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may, by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupation or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 14-64; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 34) 
Sec. 8-61. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 14-48; Res. of 12-5-1995, § 18) 
Secs. 8-62—8-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TATTOOING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Tattoo studios, O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-91. - Intent. 
The board of commissioners finds that the process of tattooing involves the use of needles that can cause the spread of infectious disease, including, but not limited to, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, hepatitis, and other viral and bacterial infection. This article is intended to protect the public welfare against the spread of such disease and infection and is based upon the recommendation and findings of the county board of health. 
(Code 2005, § 14-91; Res. of 10-5-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 8-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operate means any control, operation, conduct, or management of any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing, except that the term "tattoo artist" shall not include in its meaning any physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 42, ch. 34, nor shall it include any technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71(a). 
Tattoo studio means any facility or building on a fixed foundation wherein a tattoo artist performs tattooing. 
(Code 2005, § 14-92; Res. of 10-5-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 8-93. - Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 14-93; Res. of 10-5-1999, § 3) 
Secs. 8-94—8-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— This ordinance was adopted in May 1996. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development, will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally-protected forms of expression. This article is intended to protect forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally-protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Code 2005, § 14-111) 
Sec. 8-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment. The premises on which defined establishments operate or which defined activities occur shall constitute adult entertainment establishments, which shall include any adult business and lingerie modeling studio: 
(1)  Adult business means either: 
a.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; 
b.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Church means a place where a person regularly assembles for religious worship. 
Conviction means an adjudication of guilty, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Distance and measurement means the measurement in lineal feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment (or if not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point of ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry perpendicular to the ground level) to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. However, the measurement shall be from the closest property line on which an adult movie house is located to the closest property line on which a school, college, religious institution, public place of worship, or area zoned primarily for residential purposes is located. 
Employee means any person engaged to provide, or in fact providing, services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal consideration or otherwise. Independent contractors, such as entertainers, shall be considered employees for this article. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character, according to this article, if such person has not been convicted of a felony, any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, or a drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime in the past ten years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by a county, city or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex, or other multifamily housing for human dwelling or any properties owned therefor. 
School means state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any and all of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: sodomy, cunnilingus, fellation, lesbianism, and homosexuality; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the partner; 
(5)  Sexually-oriented torture; or 
(6)  Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a partner. 
(Code 2005, § 14-112) 
Sec. 8-113. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments as described in this article and located within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured as stated in this article: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of any single or multifamily residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for single or multifamily uses or purposes; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, governmentally-owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment establishment; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding the above, an adult entertainment establishment, operating in an unincorporated area of the county on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the distance requirements herein set forth as the same pertain to such location for so long as the licensee holds a legally recognized and perfected property right to sue and possess such location as of the date of the filing of an application for an adult entertainment license or renewal there, but only if such legal right as to such location was vested at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and such vested legal right has continued without the necessity of act or consent to renew, continue or extend such applicant's property right by applicant or other party holding a superior legal property right in such location. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in such establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(5)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of all employees. 
(6)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, on Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(7)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except for separate offices, kitchens, restrooms, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(8)  No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business. 
(9)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated such that the activity on the interior of the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or illegal controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted in or on the premises. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to expose for public view his specified anatomical areas in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 2005, § 14-113) 
Sec. 8-114. - Additional regulations applicable to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments and lingerie modeling studios. 
The following additional regulations apply to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments and lingerie modeling studios (herein adult dance establishments) as described in this article: 
(1)  All live dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(2)  No live dancing or entertaining shall occur closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(3)  No dancer, entertainer or employee shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee, so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
(4)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(5)  No dancer or entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron, nor shall any patron pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)  All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit any employee to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit an employee to insert an object into the vagina or the anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(9)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(10)  No licensee shall permit a male employee to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(11)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(12)  No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated sexual activity with any other person. 
(13)  No licensee shall permit an employee to sit upon or straddle the leg, lap or body of any patron therein or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by any patron. 
(14)  No licensee shall permit or allow a patron to participate in any act or activity upon the licensed premises which an employee is prohibited from performing. 
(Code 2005, § 14-114) 
Sec. 8-115. - Violations and penalties; service of notice. 
(a)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, in accordance with section 1-9. 
(2)  Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such businesses conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(3)  The violation of provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(b)  Service of notice. 
(1)  Any notice required to be given under this article to any applicant, licensee or employee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the county clerk. Notices mailed as described above shall be deemed given on the second day subsequent to their deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the county clerk in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Code 2005, § 14-115) 
Sec. 8-116. - Adult entertainment employees. 
(a)  Approval for employment. 
(1)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or other services to patrons, including, but not limited to, dancers and waitresses employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the county clerk. The county clerk shall immediately issue such permit upon the filing of an application and payment of the fee, which permit shall be conditional and subject to revocation upon the determination by the county clerk following investigation of the applicant that the applicant is not qualified to be an employee under this article. Upon such determination, the county clerk shall notify the applicant of such decision, which shall be final unless an appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision of the county clerk. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(b)  Application. Application for permit shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the county clerk. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, the name and address of the employer, the name and address of the place of employment and any other information reasonably required by the county clerk in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a permit. 
(c)  Fee. Any permit for employment issued under this article shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. A nonrefundable fee shall be paid to the county clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. Such fee shall be determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set out in the consolidated fee schedule. 
(d)  Prior convictions. No person who has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving use, possession or sale of any drug or controlled substance; or prostitution, sexual battery, rape, sexual assault, public indecency or any other sex act, whether consummated or attempted, unless ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or date of release, whichever is the later date, shall be issued a work permit. 
(e)  Employment after conviction. No person who is convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the crimes specified in this article while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this article for the applicable time period described above. 
(Code 2005, § 14-116) 
Secs. 8-117—8-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-131. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county, any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article, without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 2005, § 14-131) 
Sec. 8-132. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 2005, § 14-132) 
Sec. 8-133. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the board and set out in the consolidated fee schedule, shall be paid to the county manager or his designated representative of the county to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(d)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the ordinance of Pierce County." 
(e)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)  Where the applicant: 
(1)  Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either: 
a.  The majority shareholder thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
(2)  Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either: 
a.  The managing general partner thereof; or 
b.  A person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the partnership. 
(3)  Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then to the sole proprietor and a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor; 
(4)  For purposes of this subsection (f), the term "managing capacity" means the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership entity. 
(Code 2005, § 14-133) 
Sec. 8-134. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the office of the county clerk. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant; and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(b)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of security numbers of each of its current officers and directors, as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of the partners. If one or more or the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(c)  The application shall contain the address of the premises to be licensed. 
(d)  The application shall contain the name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(e)  A plat, filed in triplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 8-113, regulations, which provides that no adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential premises, parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family use or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such governmental library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; or within 1,000 feet of any establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  The names, addresses, social security numbers and dates of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(g)  Any other information reasonably required by the code department of the county in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a license. 
(h)  Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for a license and a license is issued to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of the county to act as agent for all applicants/licensees for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this article. Proof of delivery to such agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee of such notice, process or information. 
(i)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(j)  All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in triplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. Any premises to be constructed or renovated prior to opening shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The premises shall comply with all building, health and similar county codes. 
(k)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If by any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2005, § 14-134) 
Sec. 8-135. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder shall give notice that the application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the board of commissioners in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 40 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lowercase and shall be at least a one-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(b)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicants, the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the office of the county manager or his designated representative on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(c)  Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the board of commissioners, at the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which said notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or stating the following: "Pierce County adult entertainment license applied for. A hearing before the board of commissioners of Pierce County shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . All interested persons take notice." The sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 14-135) 
Sec. 8-136. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The county manager, or his designee, shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, to investigate the application and the background on the applicant, and upon completion of the investigation, shall issue such license if he finds: 
(1)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in his application. 
(3)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked in the county or any other local governmental jurisdiction located in or out of the state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this article and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the above, no license shall be issued to an applicant if, within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application, one or more of the following shall have occurred: 
a.  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
b.  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
c.  The applicant has withdrawn, without permission of the county manager or his designated representative, an application at any time within seven days immediately preceding the time and date set for the hearing before the board of commissioners unless at least one year shall have expired from such withdrawal. 
The one-year waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding 12 months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding 12 months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(10)  Notwithstanding the above, no license shall be issued by the county manager, or his designated representative, until an annual license fee, established by resolution of the board and set out in the consolidated fee schedule, is paid to the county clerk. Such annual license fee shall be in an amount set by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2005, § 14-136) 
Sec. 8-137. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar-year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. Such renewal fee shall be in an amount set by the board of commissioners from time to time and set out in the consolidated fee schedule. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Code 2005, § 14-137) 
Sec. 8-138. - License nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and exception, however, that if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and, in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the county manager, or his designated representative. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2005, § 14-138) 
Sec. 8-139. - Change of location. 
No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Code 2005, § 14-139) 
Sec. 8-140. - Change of name. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(Code 2005, § 14-140) 
Sec. 8-141. - Modification of licensed premises. 
After the issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building within the premises, customer entry locations, or other changes shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 14-141) 
Sec. 8-142. - License; refusal. 
If the county manager, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall so notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final unless an appeal is filed to the board of commissioners by any aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision of the county manager. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the board. 
(Code 2005, § 14-142) 
Sec. 8-143. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Suspension. The county manager shall suspend a license for a period of 180 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has violated any section of this article. If the county manager deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the county manager's notification unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the county manager. A hearing by the board of commissioners of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Enforcement of the suspension shall be stayed pending the board's ruling on the licensee's appeal. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  The county manager shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(2)  The county manager shall also revoke a license if he determines that: 
a.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process. 
b.  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
c.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, or copulation, masturbation, or other illegal sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
d.  The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(3)  If the county manager deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the county manager's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the board of commissioners by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the county manager. A hearing of the board of commissioners on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the board. Revocation shall continue for a one-year period from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(c)  Appeal procedure. An applicant or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the board of commissioners, as allowed by this article, shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of commissioners. At the time set for the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from county staff or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: 
a.  The county representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; 
b.  The charged party shall then present his evidence. 
Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The charged party and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the board of commissioners may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(Code 2005, § 14-143) 
Secs. 8-144—8-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNSHOPS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; liens—pawnbrokers, factors, bailees, etc., see O.C.G.A. § 44-14-400 et seq.; liens—jewelers, O.C.G.A. § 44-14-430 et seq. 

Sec. 8-163. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or articles containing any precious metal or gem, including coins, from members of the general public for resale to brokers, dealers or melters. 
Electronic reporting system means a computer-based system, as specified by the sheriff, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Gem means any precious or semi-precious stone which is cut and polished. 
Goods means every species of tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of, or in conjunction with, the business activities described in this section. 
Pawnshop means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity, however organized. 
Precious metal means gold, silver or platinum or any metal containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Secondhand dealer means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose business includes purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, or receiving secondhand personal property of any kind or description. However, any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose business is the purchase and resale of clothing, furniture, or the resale of goods that are donated to a business exempt from federal taxation as a charitable organization shall not be deemed a secondhand dealer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-1), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-164. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a buyer of precious metals and gems to engage in such business within the county without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-3), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-165. - Application for license. 
Applicants for a license pursuant to this article shall file with the county clerk a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president of the corporation, and showing the following: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on within the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; the name and address of the person on whose account the business will be conducted, if any; and, if a corporation, the name of the state in which the corporation is incorporated; 
(2)  The place within the city where it is proposed to conduct the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business will be conducted; 
(3)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as representative; and 
(4)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity and character of the person having the management or supervision of the business and the manner of doing business as the city council may deem proper in order to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-4), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-166. - Bond. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this article, the applicant shall file with the county commission a bond binding the applicant to the county in the full sum of $10,000.00, executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety approved by the county commission, conditioned on the applicant's full compliance with the ordinances of the county and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such ordinances or statutes. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the county in its own behalf. 
(b)  Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this article, the applicant shall file with the county clerk an instrument appointing the county clerk as his true and lawful agent for service of process upon the applicant for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach thereof. Immediately upon service of process upon the county clerk, as provided in this article, the clerk shall send to the licensee at his last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-5), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-167. - Posting of license. 
The license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in the place of business named therein. If the applicant desires to do business in more than one place within the county, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously and prominently in each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-6), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-168. - License fee. 
Licensees under this article shall pay a license fee in an amount determined from time to time by action of the board of commissioners and set out in the county consolidated fee schedule for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee engages in business within the county. For each business location in addition to one, the licensee shall pay an additional license fee as determined by the action of the board for each calendar year or portion of a year in which the licensee conducts business at such additional location. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-7), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-169. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the chairperson and county commission, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any purchase transaction; 
(3)  Failure to maintain the daily record as required in this article; 
(4)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this article in any unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the notice personally to the person in charge of the licensee's business, or by mailing the notice, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last-known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-8), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-170. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person or business engaged as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems within the county shall secure from every person from whom he receives any goods, except used books, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a social security or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face. Each digital image shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption. If the same subject makes additional transactions within 30 days of the original transaction; provides the same government-issued photo identification card as mentioned above; and the subject's appearance has not materially changed, a new digital photograph shall not be required until a transaction is made after 30 days from the original transaction; 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, and a digital photograph or image of the goods acquired, including the following information, if available: 
a.  Brand name; 
b.  Model number; 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number; 
d.  Size; 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye; 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known; 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones; 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish; 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters; 
j.  The date and time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain the above information and digital photographs or images for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(6)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall require the seller to sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as title pawn transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title, takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-9), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-171. - Report to sheriff; required format. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems located within the county shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the sheriff, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made each day prior to 11:59 p.m. for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. If an operator or dealer is closed, or does not otherwise engage in any transactions on a particular day, a report indicating no transactions shall be filed for that day. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement website designated by the sheriff. When technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the sheriff's office in lieu thereof. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the receipt of used books or pawn transactions commonly known as title pawn transactions where the pawnbroker takes possession of a motor vehicle certificate of title, takes a security interest in the motor vehicle certificate of title, and retains physical possession of the vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-10), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-172. - Hold period; police holds. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, dealer in precious metals and gems, or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this article who takes goods on pawn or who buys goods, taking full title thereto, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn for at least 30 days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  The sheriff's office of the county, or any other law enforcement agency, has the authority to place property that is the subject of law enforcement investigation on police hold. In that event, the sheriff's office, or other law enforcement agency, shall notify the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-11), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-173. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, dealer in precious metals and gems or person operating under a license granted pursuant to this article to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in the daily record of said business; 
(2)  Make any false entry in the daily record of said business; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate or destroy the daily record of said business or remove the daily record from the place of business; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any sheriff's officer or duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect the daily record of said business or any goods in the possession of said business during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; or 
(5)  Fail to comply with this article in any other material way. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-12), 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 8-174. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1(1-2), 1-3-2017) 
Chapter 10 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons, to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions, to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic wellbeing of the citizens of the state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or by-product, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside the state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the state. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power, including, without limitation, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
(Code 2005, § 18-31; Res. of 8-4-1981, § I) 
Sec. 10-20. - Office of the county emergency management agency. 
In coordination with the governing officials of cities and/or towns within the county, there is hereby established the county emergency management agency. The board of commissioners of the county shall nominate for appointment, by the state director of emergency management, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the director of emergency management is charged: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county, and cities and/or towns therein, on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  With assisting county and city officials in organizing county and, where required, city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  With developing, in conjunction with other county departments, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 10-19. Such plan will be in consonant with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for approval before submission to the state director for approval. 
(4)  With maintaining the emergency management agency in carrying out the administration and management of the county emergency management program, including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management and homeland security agency. 
(5)  With rendering reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  With procuring, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(Code 2005, § 18-32; Res. of 8-4-1981, § II) 
Sec. 10-21. - County emergency management organization. 
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county departments and agencies and the emergency functions listed in section 10-19 are assigned as follows: 

 
(Code 2005, § 18-33; Res. of 8-4-1981, § III) 
Sec. 10-22. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for the county. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chairperson may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately, and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chairperson finds that emergency conditions no longer exist at which time, the chairperson shall execute and file with the county manager a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairperson. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chairperson shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The county emergency management agency director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director, or his designee, is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency, and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chairperson is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chairperson may cause to become effective any of the following sections as appropriate: section 10-24 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 10-25 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the county manager and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 10-23, as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the county manager. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provisions for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county manager and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections which shall be in effect. 
"Declaration Of Local Emergency" 
Whereas, Pierce County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the chairperson of the Pierce County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Pierce County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Pierce County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
Whereas, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
Now, therefore, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
It is hereby declared that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
Therefore, it is ordered: 
a.  That the Pierce County Emergency Management Agency activates the emergency operations plan; 
b.  That the following sections of the Pierce County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 10-24, registration of building and repair services; and/or section 10-25, closed or restricted areas and curfews]; and 
c.  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from section 10-22(a)(4)c or d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
Entered at [time] on [date]. 
____________ 
Chairperson, Pierce County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Code 2005, § 18-34; Res. of 8-4-1981, § IV; Ord. No. 2012-1, § 2, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-23. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairperson of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. Local legislation should be reviewed to determine whether there are restrictions upon moving the meeting location if it is only a locally declared emergency and not a state of emergency declared by the governor. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairperson of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners, or its designees, may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" means fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chairperson of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners, or its designees, may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though this is not otherwise permitted by the development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-1, § 4, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-24. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the county development board and secure a building permit that is posted at the worksite. Each day any such entity does business in the county without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster shall be fixed by action of the board from time to time and set out in the consolidated fee schedule. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or Federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  State sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  State business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency by the governor and local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. No. 2012-1, § 5, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-25. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons or their property within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairperson until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairperson shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairperson shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential healthcare providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the EMA director or the sheriff. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2012-1, § 6, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-26. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Code 2005, § 18-35; Res. of 8-4-1981, § V) 
Sec. 10-27. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, homeland security, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this article are continued in full force and effect. Such regulations are on file in the office of the county manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-1, § 7, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-28. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this article and/or implemented by the chairperson or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this article, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chairperson or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency, shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-9. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article may be enforced by the county sheriff's office, the EMA director and chairperson of the BOC. 
(Code 2005, § 18-36; Res. of 8-4-1981, § VI; Ord. No. 2012-1, § 3, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-29. - Liberality of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Code 2005, § 18-37; Res. of 8-4-1981, § VII) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers, duties and responsibility of department of natural resources to develop minimum standards for protection of wetlands, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 12-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Pierce County Wetlands Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Intent and purpose. 
The wetlands of the county are important to the environment and shall be protected. The purpose of this chapter is to recognize and require adherence to federal regulations and procedures that govern the development of land that contain wetlands within the county. The regulations contained in this chapter are created under the requirement of the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1344) (CWA). Any of the county government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this chapter, the Clean Water Act or any other ordinance, resolution or regulation of the county, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate individual properties where activities will not impact wetlands and do not require a land disturbing permit. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Anaerobic means not having molecular oxygen (O 2 ) present. 
Applicant means any person who seeks permission to engage in any regulated activity on any land that contains wetland areas, as those terms are defined herein. 
COE means United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
Community development director means the director, or his designee, of the county community development department. 
Generalized wetlands map means the latest edition of the county maps generated from national wetlands inventory mapping. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means any plant growing in water or in soil that is at least periodically anaerobic as a result of saturation; or plants typically found in wet habitats. 
Jurisdictional wetlands means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the United States Army. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetlands boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1344, as amended). 
National wetlands inventory (NWI) maps means a series of maps produced by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service showing the location and classification of wetlands in standard topographical areas. A wetlands inventory area does not necessarily represent jurisdictional wetlands and shall not serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or wetland delineation. 
Regulated activity means any activity that will, or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fills material into waters of the United States, excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands, as defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency, means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve temporary or permanent sources of water to cause soil saturation. 
Wetlands delineation means the establishment of wetlands boundaries by a representative of the United States Army Corps of Engineers and authority designated by the COE, or the director, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1344), as amended. Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the COE, Wetlands Delineation Manual (Technical Report Y-87-1, January 1987). 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  Wetlands protection district; boundaries; map. 
(1)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established, which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are identified, designated and mapped as wetland areas by the county board of commissioners. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(2)  The generalized wetlands map and the established wetlands protection district do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and shall not serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries approved by the COE, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this chapter shall not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(3)  The generalized wetlands map is available in the community development department and incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within an area shown as a wetland on the generalized wetlands map, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging, except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that an individual 404 permit is required. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within wetlands shown on the generalized wetlands map: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Benefits. 
Important benefits to county citizens that are derived from wetlands protection include: 
(1)  Flood control; 
(2)  Erosion control; 
(3)  Improved water quality due to the retention of sediment, nutrients, and toxic materials; 
(4)  Aesthetics; 
(5)  Recreational and natural resource education opportunities; 
(6)  Open space. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 5) 
Sec. 12-6. - Authority and applicability. 
(a)  Permits. Terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to all activities that require the issuance of a land disturbance permit on any real property within the county. No land disturbing permit shall be issued by the community development director without it being determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Site plans. Application for a land disturbing permit within the wetlands protection division shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetlands boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection system designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(c)  Activities to comply with site plan. All activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or remove or change the overall appearance of the development, as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the community development director. Minor changes such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(d)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirements for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single-family detached and duplex dwellings constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 6) 
Sec. 12-7. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Jurisdictional wetlands shall be protected according to the regulation of the state, COE, Environmental Protection Agency and all other applicable state and federal regulations. Under current federal law and state policy, alterations or degradation of wetlands should be avoided unless it can be demonstrated that there will be no long-term impacts or net loss of wetlands. Any unavoidable degradation or loss must be mitigated through the restoration, creation, enhancement or preservation of other waters of the United States. 
(b)  If the applicant can provide to the community development director a valid COE wetlands delineation that verifies that the proposed activity is not located within jurisdictional wetlands, or if the applicant can provide a valid COE permit or letter that authorized the proposed activity within jurisdictional wetlands, then the community development director shall follow current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit. If such evidence of compliance with COE permitting requirements is not provided, then the procedures are as follows: the community development director shall consult the generalized wetlands map to assess whether the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  If the community development director determines that the proposed activity is of a type that could not result in a disturbance of wetlands or if the proposed activity is not located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district, the community development director shall follow current procedures for issuing a land disturbing permit. 
(2)  If the community development director determines that the proposed activity is located in the wetlands protection district or within 100 feet of the wetlands protection district and that the proposed activity is of a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands, a COE jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a land disturbing permit. 
(3)  If the COE determines that a permit or letter of permission is required, a land disturbing permit shall be issued only following issuance of a COE permit or letter of permission. If the COE determines that the proposed activity would not require a COE permit or letter of permission, the community development director shall proceed with current procedures for issuing a land disturbance permit based on documentation of the COE determination. If the COE determines that wetlands mitigation is required, the applicant shall perform mitigation in the county, unless such action conflicts with the direction of COE. 
(4)  If under any of the provisions of this section a conflict occurs between the community development director and the applicant with regards to the proposed activity being a type that could result in a disturbance of wetlands, the applicant shall provide the community development director with the appropriate COE documentation to resolve the conflict. 
(c)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the county inspections and permits division and will be reviewed within 15 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, disapproval) by the community development director. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is deemed to be approved. Decisions of the community development director may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 7) 
Sec. 12-8. - Penalties. 
(a)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to remove the structure and will be subject, upon conviction, to the punishment provided in section 1-9. 
(b)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation as far as practicable. 
(c)  If the community development director determines that a violation of this chapter also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the community development director shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the applicant and/or property owner. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2005, § 8) 
Chapter 14 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-19. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has, in Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I, and art. IX, § II, ¶ III, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 2005, § 26-31; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 14-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 2005, § 26-32; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 14-21. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 2005, § 26-33; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 14-22. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2005, § 26-34; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 14-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county code inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a firm as Zone VI-30, VE or V. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a non-basement built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (post and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Mangrove stand means an assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: Black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); buttonood (Conocarpus erecta); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); or white mangrove (Longuncular-iaracemosa). 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures, placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. The term "mean sea level" is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. The term "permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 2005, § 26-35; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 2) 
Sec. 14-24. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 26-36; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 14-25. - Basis for establishing the areas of special hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood hazard boundary map (FIRM) dated April 17, 1989, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 26-37; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 14-26. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 2005, § 26-38; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 14-27. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 2005, § 26-39; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § D) 
Sec. 14-28. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 2005, § 26-40; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § E) 
Sec. 14-29. - Interpretation. 
The interpretation and application of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county, or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 2005, § 26-41; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 14-30. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 26-42; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 3, § H) 
Secs. 14-31—14-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-49. - Designation of county code inspector. 
The county code inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article. 
(Code 2005, § 26-61; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 14-50. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county code inspector on forms furnished by the county prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; and existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings; 
b.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 14-79(2); 
c.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed or instances where building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the county code inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the lowest portion of the horizontal structure members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The county code inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey, or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Code 2005, § 26-62; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 14-51. - Duties and responsibilities of the code inspector. 
Duties of the code inspector shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittees that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration of relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 14-50(2). 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings which have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 14-50(2). 
(7)  In coastal hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the building is designed to be securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash. 
(8)  In coastal high hazard areas, the county code inspector shall review plans for adequacy of breakaway walls in accordance with section 14-79. 
(9)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the county code inspector shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 14-79(2). 
(10)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the area of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the county code inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(11)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-25, then the county code inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 14-78 et seq. All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the county planning commission. 
(Code 2005, § 26-63; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 14-52. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The county planning commission, as established by the county, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The county planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the county code inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county planning commission or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the magistrate's court as provided by statute. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsections (h)(1) and (4) of this section and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the building losing its historical designation. 
(e)  In passing upon applications, the county planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management for the area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this article, the county planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  Determination that granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built, and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The county code inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Code 2005, § 26-64; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 4, § D) 
Secs. 14-53—14-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-78. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utilities resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of new construction, as contained in this article; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if such nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Code 2005, § 26-91; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 14-79. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 14-25 or section 14-51(11), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 14-51(9). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of the openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard, established in section 14-25, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and have erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base discharge; 
b.  If subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division; 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring standards of section 14-78(2), and the elevation standards of subsection (1) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (4)a of this section are met. 
(Code 2005, § 26-92; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 5, § B) 
Sec. 14-80. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-25, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-51(11). 
(Code 2005, § 26-93; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 14-81. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 2005, § 26-94; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 5, § D) 
Sec. 14-82. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-25, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Code 2005, § 26-95; Ord. of 10-7-1997, art. 5, § E) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 

Sec. 16-19. - Purpose. 
There is hereby created and established within the unincorporated areas of the county, an ordinance to prohibit conduct which is offensive and adverse to public safety, which conduct is hereby classified as disorderly. 
(Code 2005, § 30-31; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 16-20. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
No person shall engage in or exhibit disorderly conduct within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 2005, § 30-32; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 2) 
Sec. 16-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disorderly conduct means conduct which shall be deemed to be offensive and adverse to public safety and thereby classified as disorderly conduct. The term "disorderly conduct" is exhibited or occurs when any person: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby any person is placed in reasonable fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Endangers the lawful pursuits of another person by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another person; 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another person for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the county; 
(8)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(9)  Assembles, for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the county, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(10)  Accosts or attempts to force his company upon any person; 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger in the presence of another, any obscene, vulgar or profane words or epithets; 
(12)  Who is knowingly present at any place where illegal gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(13)  Acts in a dangerous manner towards others; 
(14)  Uses fighting words, as defined by state law, directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(15)  Assembles or congregates for the purpose of trouncing upon another; 
(16)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)  Congregates with another in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear any such public way when ordered by the law enforcement officers or other lawful authority; 
(18)  Enters upon the tracks, rights-of-way, yards, piggyback facilities, agencies, building or other properties of any railroad company operating in the county, provided that this subsection shall not apply to on-duty officers, agents or employees of any railroad company operating in the county, or those persons conducting bona fide business with the railroad company; 
(19)  Tampers with any railroad switch, wire or line or signal or places any object on the track that would otherwise obstruct the movement or operation of a train, provided that this subsection shall not apply to on-duty officers, agents or employees of any railroad company operating in the county or those persons conducting bona fide business with the railroad company; 
(20)  Gets on or off any locomotive engine, railroad car, trailer or container, provided that this subsection shall not apply to on-duty officers, agents or employees of any railroad company operating in the county or those persons conducting bona fide business with the railroad company. 
(Code 2005, § 30-33; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 3) 
Sec. 16-22. - Enforcement. 
Any magistrate of the county, the sheriff of the county, the deputies thereof, and all other law enforcement officers, to specifically include railroad police, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the officer who completes and services it. 
(Code 2005, § 30-34; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 4) 
Sec. 16-23. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article, or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 30-35; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 5) 
Sec. 16-24. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in section 16-22 and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations. The county attorney or the solicitor of the state court of the county shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2005, § 30-36; Ord. of 8-5-1991, § 6) 
Secs. 16-25—16-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDIGENT DEFENSE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 16-52. - Application for indigent defense services. 
(a)  Each person lacking the financial ability to provide for themselves representation in their defense in criminal proceedings in the state court or magistrate court of the county, and desiring that the county provide such services to them, shall submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation and setting forth the specifics supporting their need for such indigent representation. 
(b)  The application shall be submitted to the court clerk (upon intake at the jail, upon first appearance, and at any pre-trail hearing) on a form approved by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 16-53. - Application fee. 
Each application for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee of $50.00 to the clerk of the court in which indigent representation is being sought. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, § 2, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 16-54. - Wavier. 
The fee required by section 16-53 may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, § 3, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 16-55. - Transfer of funds. 
Within ten days after the end of each month, the clerk of the court, in receipt of application fees required by section 16-53, shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, § 4, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 16-56. - Separate account. 
The funds remitted to the governing authority pursuant to section 16-55, shall be maintained in a separate fund for indigent defense services and shall be expended only for the purpose of providing legal representation to indigent defendants in the state court and magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2005-4, § 5, 3-8-2005) 
Chapter 18 - ROADS AND BRIDGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Utility facilities. 
The regulations of the state department of transportation with respect to utilities on the state highway system, entitled "Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual," dated 2016, as promulgated, is hereby adopted by reference as the governing regulation of the county, with the following modifications: 
(1)  All references to the state department of transportation, or the department, shall be read as referring to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  All references to state highway, roads or rights-of-way shall be read as referring to county roads or rights-of-way within the county road system lying outside the corporate limits of any municipality. 
(3)  The authority under which the regulations are adopted shall be amended to those applicable to county regulations of roads and rights-of-way, specifically including the authority, under O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(6), to promulgate regulations consistent with those of the department of transportation. 
(4)  All references to the department's district engineer shall be read to refer to the county road superintendent, as designated by the board of commissioners from time to time; the county clerk shall, on request, provide the name, telephone number, and address of the person or firm designated the county road superintendent for the purpose of enforcing the utility regulations hereby adopted. 
(5)  Such minor language adjustments as are required to read, interpret, and enforce the regulations on behalf of and in connection with county roads and rights-of-way by the county, but in no event shall any such adjustment change or effect any substantive requirement or result in any regulation more restrictive than as written for enforcement by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 2005, § 38-1; Ord. of 3-5-2002) 
Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDRESS AND STREET NUMBERING 

Sec. 18-21. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish a system for the orderly naming of streets within the county and the standards for numbering and posting of numbers on all dwelling units and commercial establishments thereon. Further, this article empowers the board of commissioners to enforce the assignment of street numbering of all such dwelling and commercial units constructed thereon. 
(b)  The enactment of this article should also facilitate the location of residences and businesses by the police, fire, sheriff, district attorney, animal control, business permits and emergency management departments. It will further facilitate the enhanced 911 system by ensuring that every location with telephone service will have a defined location. 
(Code 2005, § 38-31; Ord. of 8-10-1992) 
Sec. 18-22. - Designation of street numbers. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets, and street numbers and/or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartments/condominiums and nonresidential developments located on private streets, shall be assigned by the board of commissioners in accordance with its administrative procedures. 
(Code 2005, § 38-32; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 1) 
Sec. 18-23. - Designation of street names. 
Street names for all public streets, as well as street names for private streets that are opened for public access on a continuing basis, shall be assigned by the board of commissioners, in accordance with its administrative procedures in order to avoid duplication. A written petition for the change of an approved street name may be made to the board of commissioners by 70 percent or more of the residents and/or property owners residing on such street. Consideration will be given to such a petition, provided that the requested name does not conflict with other approved street names as to duplication, similar sounds and/or similar spellings. 
(Code 2005, § 38-33; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 18-24. - Posting of designated street addresses. 
Each dwelling unit and place of business shall have posted and maintained, in a prominent place on the property, street numbers visible for a distance of 150 feet from the street providing general public access. 
(1)  Residential. The address of the residential dwelling unit shall be in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background of a material that will allow 24-hour visibility, and be placed within 15 feet of the back of the street curbing or edge of the street surface. If the numbers are placed beyond the 15-foot requirement, the figures will be at least four inches high. 
(2)  Nonresidential. The address of the nonresidential establishments shall be in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background of a material that will allow 24-hour visibility, and be placed within 15 feet of the back of the street curbing or edge of the street surface. If the figures are placed beyond the 15-foot limit, the letters will be at least six inches high. 
(Code 2005, § 38-34; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 18-25. - Special considerations. 
(a)  All street numbering will be assigned in such a manner that, when traveling from the lower numbers to the higher numbers, the odd numbers will be to the right and the even numbers to the left. 
(b)  Any site where a telephone line (circuit) with dial tone exists, regardless of the terminating equipment, shall be assigned a street address for E911 purposes. 
(Code 2005, § 38-35; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 18-26. - Exceptions. 
Sites for utility services which are normally unmanned, but have been assigned a street number for E911 purposes, are exempt from any required posting (display) of such an address. Such sites would be traffic control points, water and radio tower sites, utility power substations, etc. 
(Code 2005, § 38-36; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 18-27. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 38-37; Ord. of 8-10-1992, § 7) 
Secs. 18-28—18-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE WAYS 

Sec. 18-58. - Culvert required. 
Any person attempting to construct a private way from a county road over a ditch located beside said road shall install a culvert in such ditch prior to the creation or installation of such driveway. 
(Code 2005, § 38-61; Ord. of 5-7-1990, § I) 
Sec. 18-59. - Placing in and filling up of ditch prohibited. 
The placing in and filling up of any ditch located beside any county road for the purpose of installing or creating a private way from the county road over such ditch to a home or residence by any person is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 2005, § 38-62; Ord. of 5-7-1990, § II) 
Sec. 18-60. - Costs. 
Any person attempting to construct five or more private ways from a county road over a ditch located beside said road shall be responsible for the costs of installing culverts in such ditch prior to the creation or installation of such driveways. 
(Code 2005, § 38-63; Ord. of 5-7-1990, § III) 
Sec. 18-61. - Violation. 
Any person violating the terms of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 38-64; Ord. of 5-7-1990, § IV) 
Chapter 20 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, § 2, ¶ 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 20-19. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all municipal solid waste landfills, as that term is defined O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(20), as may be amended from time to time, including all related solid waste handling facilities, as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(35), as may be amended from time to time. Any person desiring to operate a municipal solid waste landfill or related solid waste handling facility within the county shall apply for a business license and shall demonstrate proof of compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 20-20. - Traffic safety. 
(a)  All such operations shall be located on a state highway or county primary road, as defined by the board of commissioners, for ingress and egress thereto, and on a road that does not create traffic through an area developed primarily for residential purposes. Where necessary, the board of commissioners may require the applicant to construct and/or improve a road to accommodate the truck travel necessitated by the operations, as a condition of such operation, and for the purpose of routing traffic around residential areas. A stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the owner/operator at all egress roads from the landfill. Under no circumstances shall trucks use private drives or private access routes to or from the applicant's property that are within 300 feet of any residence. 
(b)  Sufficient setback shall be provided from all property lines and public highways to ensure adequate lateral support for adjacent public and private property. No disposal area shall be permitted closer than 500 feet from the interior boundary lines. Disposal areas shall at no time be permitted where adjoining lateral support for the maintenance of adjoining land is not maintained. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 20-21. - Environmental protection. 
(a)  No disposal areas shall be permitted closer than 1,000 feet to any residence or water supply well, or within 1,000 feet of any residential district. No disposal areas shall be permitted closer than 500 feet to state waters, as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(16), as may be amended from time to time, and as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Any related solid waste handling facility and its accessory structures shall not be located closer than 500 feet from the interior boundary lines, nor 1,000 feet from any residence or water supply well. Where practicable, the solid waste handling facility shall be as close to the center of the subject property as possible and at a lower level than the surrounding terrain to lessen visual and noise impact. The foregoing shall not apply to the municipal solid waste landfill. 
(c)  No disposal area shall interfere with the established natural flow of surface waters to the detriment of or damage to adjoining public or private properties. The board of commissioners shall have the right to require an applicant to construct adequate sediment basins if it appears that substantial water or sediment may be carried into any nearby property or state waters. 
(d)  Hazardous wastes, as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62(10), as may be amended from time to time, are prohibited. 
(e)  No disposal area shall be located within a seismic impact zone, as that term is defined by the state environmental protection division's Rules for Solid Waste Management, GA. Comp. R. & Regs. R. 391-3-4-.05(1)(g), as may be amended from time to time. 
(f)  Prior to the commencement of the construction of any landfill within the county, the owner/operator of the proposed landfill shall obtain from all state waters and from all water supply wells located within two miles of the boundaries of all property owned by the owner/operator of the landfill, a water sample, which shall be analyzed for all constituents listed in appendix I and appendix II to 40 CFR part 258, subpart E, as amended, 56 Fed. Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991), by a properly accredited laboratory approved by the board of commissioners. These samples shall contain the exact location from which they were obtained, the name and address of the property owner who owns the land from which the water sample was taken, and the name and address of the principal user of the water supply well, if different from the owner of the property upon which the well is located. The results of the individual analysis shall be certified by the laboratory, submitted to each property owner from whose property a sample was taken, and filed with the board of commissioners. 
(g)  All wells to be included in the groundwater monitoring program required by the state environmental protection division shall be monitored quarterly for all constituents in appendix I to 40 CFR part 258, subpart E, as amended, 56 Fed. Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991), and shall be monitored annually for all constituents in appendix II to 40 CFR part 258, subpart E, as amended, 56 Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991). Copies of all monitoring test well results shall be delivered to the board of commissioners promptly upon receipt by the owner/operator. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 20-22. - Sight barriers and fencing. 
(a)  Sight barriers shall be provided along setback lines of the sites which lack natural screening conditions provided by existing contours or evergreen growth consist with the sight barriers prescribed by this subsection. Sight barriers shall consist of the following: a berm of at least ten feet in height and plantings of evergreen trees, not more than ten feet apart, or evergreen shrubbery not more than five feet apart, in staggered rows, on the berm, parallel to the boundaries of the property. Evergreens shall be at least two-year transplants at the time of planting, shall grow to not less than ten feet in height within two years or less, and shall be sufficiently spaced to provide effective sight barriers when ten feet in height. Trees or shrubs which die must be replaced promptly. 
(b)  The landfill is to be completely fenced with an eight-foot high, chain-link fence with three strands of barbed wire, angled 45 degrees toward the outside of the premises on the top. Such fence shall be located inside of any berms or screening following the exterior boundaries. All entrances to the landfill shall have an eight-foot-high gate, which shall be closed and locked at all times that the landfill is not open. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 20-23. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  Air pollution, noise, and vibration, and their effects upon adjacent properties shall be minimized by the use of adequate soundproofed equipment and buildings designed to accomplish such minimization and approved by the board of commissioners, and by the proper use of berms, walls, and natural planting screens. Interior and adjoining roads used in the operations shall have their surfaces treated to minimize air pollution, noise, and vibration. 
(b)  Rodent traps shall be placed 100 yards apart around the perimeter of the landfill, inside the fence, and shall be inspected and cleaned not less frequently than once per day. 
(c)  Any security lighting deemed necessary by the owner/operator shall be the sodium vapor type and shall be aligned so that no part of the illuminated field shall fall on any adjoining property. 
(d)  Every landfill shall, at its own expense, connect to a public water supply and install at least one outlet per square acre in order to ensure an adequate water supply and facilities for quick delivery of water to any part of the property for the purpose of extinguishing fires. Capacity shall be such that at least 50 gallons of water per minute can be applied to any fire, continuously, for at least ten hours. The source of the water supply and the facilities to provide for the delivery of the water shall be indicated on the plans submitted for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Every landfill shall, at its own expense, connect to a public sewer system for the disposal of its leachate. If necessary for the local publicly-owned treatment works to handle the leachate, the owner/operator of any landfill shall fund all necessary improvements to the publicly-owned treatment works through which leachate from the landfill will be discharged. 
(f)  All litter shall be collected from the landfill site by the end of each working day and either placed in the fill, compacted and covered that day, or stored in a covered container. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 20-24. - Operating hours. 
All operations, other than the maintenance of equipment within a fully-enclosed building, shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have qualified personnel on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside within the county in close enough proximity to respond immediately in the event of a fire. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 20-25. - Liability insurance. 
All applicants shall be required to carry personal injury and property damage insurance, in addition to any and all bonds required by state law, during operation of the landfill, including closure and post-closure, and for not less than 20 years after the expiration of the post-closure period. Such insurance shall be in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each person injured or property damaged per incident. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation and upon properties in the vicinity of the landfill as the result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation. Such policies shall be issued by an insurance carrier approved by the board of commissioners, and such policies shall be filed with the board of commissioners. The deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five percent of the per-incident limit of the liability of the policy. The coverage obtained by the owner/operator to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provisions that the insurer shall notify the board of commissioners 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 20-26. - Reclamation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A reclamation or redevelopment plan for the closed landfill shall be submitted to and approved by the board of commissioners along with the application submitted pursuant to this article. The plan shall propose reclamation or redevelopment that will best serve the needs and interest of the citizens of the county. Reclamation or redevelopment shall be accomplished as soon as practicable following closure of any area of the landfill. Substantial completion of reclamation or redevelopment shall be effected within two years after the termination of the waste disposal facility. Inactivity for six consecutive months shall constitute, for this purpose, termination of disposal activities. 
(b)  Approval of a reclamation or redevelopment plan by the board of commissions will be based upon the consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The most advantageous use of the land, resources, and property. 
(2)  The character of the area in question and its particular suitability, if any, for the particular use. 
(3)  Conservation of property values as well as natural resources and the general appropriate trend and character of development in the subject area. 
(4)  The protection and preservation of the general health, safety, and welfare of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 20-27. - Submission of design and operation plans. 
No landfill activities shall be allowed or commenced until a plan has been submitted to the board of commissioners, disclosing compliance with all of the provisions of this article. Such plans shall include, among other things, the following: 
(1)  A copy of the design and operation plan submitted to and approved by the state environmental protection division. 
(2)  A map disclosing the location of all state waters and water supply wells from which the samples will be taken for analysis in accordance with section 20-21 and disclosing the groundwater flow directions in all aquifers. 
(3)  A written agreement, signed by the owner/operator of the landfill, agreeing to abide by the following plan for solutions to groundwater contamination should such contamination occur as a result, or suspected result, of his disposal operations. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 9) 
Sec. 20-28. - A trust fund for the mitigation of landfill problems. 
(a)  A trust fund shall be established at a bank within the county, chosen by the board of commissioners. The operator shall pay $1.00 per ton of waste disposed into this trust fund for the life of the landfill. Expenditures from the trust fund are to be approved by a committee consisting of one citizen appointed by the board of commissioners, the chairperson of the board of commissioners, and one representative of the owner/operator. Funds may be used for, without limitation, off-site litter control, groundwater and surface water monitoring, provision of alternate water supplies, and payments to adjacent property owners and others, at the discretion of the committee, for damages caused as a result of the landfill or its related operations. The trust fund shall exist and earn interest for 20 years following the expiration of the post-closure period, and at that time, the remaining funds shall be paid to the owner/operator or his successors or assigns. 
(b)  In the event that there is a statistically significant increase over background values, as determined by the board of commissioners, for any constituent for which monitoring is required, further waste disposal shall cease until such time as the groundwater contamination has been remediated to background values. When any water supply well is located down gradient and within one mile of a contaminant plume, as determined by the board of commissioners, an alternate water supply shall, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be provided by the owner/operator of the landfill, and at the expense of the owner/operator, for protection of the public health and welfare. Bottled water shall be provided as a temporary measure until a permanent, alternate water supply can be provided by installing a new well in a location approved by the board of commissioners and the affected property owner, by connecting the property owner to an existing municipal water supply if acceptable to the property owner, or, if so requested by the board of commissioners, by building for and donating to the county a public water supply system. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 10) 
Sec. 20-29. - Financial guarantee. 
Financial guarantee shall be given to the county, ensuring the proper closure and reclamation or redevelopment of the landfill. The amount of the guarantee shall not be less than $5,000.00 per acre, but not less than $100,000.00 nor more than $1,000,000.00. All such financial guarantees shall be reviewed annually on or about the anniversary date of the landfill permit, and the amount of the financial guarantee may be increased or decreased based upon the cost of living index promulgated by the U.S. Department of Labor, using the date of issuance of the business license pursuant to this article as the base period for the $5,000.00 per acre amount. Such financial guarantee shall be in the form of cash, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit issued by a bank located within the county chosen by the board of commissioners, or trust fund established at a bank within the county chosen by the board of commissioners. The financial guarantee shall be provided prior to issuance of the business license required by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 11) 
Sec. 20-30. - Inspection. 
The board of commissioners, or its duly authorized representative, shall have access to the landfill during all hours of operation for the purpose of inspecting the landfill and related operations to ensure compliance with requirements of this article. Keys for admittance to the landfill shall be given to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 12) 
Sec. 20-31. - Access by citizens of the county. 
Any landfill shall be open to county residents, property owners, and businesses, during established business hours, at a rate to be agreed upon by the board of commissioners. Special handling fees may be charged for bulky or difficult to process items. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 13) 
Sec. 20-32. - Existing sanitary landfill operations. 
This article shall not apply to any permitted landfill operation existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any such landfill shall be allowed to continue in operation in accordance with the permit issued by the state environmental protection division. This article shall apply, however, to any new or expanded landfill for which a permit is issued by the state environmental protection division on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2006, § 14) 
Secs. 20-33—20-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD TRIMMING 

Sec. 20-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid wastes means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills and municipal solid waste thermal treatment facilities. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2005, § 42-31; Res. of 9-3-1996, § I(A)) 
Sec. 20-54. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with solid waste within the county. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any solid waste disposal facility having a liner or leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(Code 2005, § 42-32; Res. of 9-3-1996, § I(B)) 
Sec. 20-55. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
The following restrictions apply to yard trimmings which are generated in or may ultimately be disposed of in the county. These restrictions shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste; 
(2)  There is a ban on the disposal of yard trimmings at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within its jurisdiction; 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling; and 
(4)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(Code 2005, § 42-33; Res. of 9-3-1996, § I(C)) 
Sec. 20-56. - Penalties. 
Any person violating section 20-55 shall be punished, upon conviction, in accordance with the provisions of section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 42-34; Res. of 9-3-1996, § I(D)) 
Chapter 22 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; enforcement of traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED 

Sec. 22-22. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, the speed limits in subsection (b) of this section are adopted. 
(b)  The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
(1)  On-system highways. 

 
Signs to be erected by the department of transportation for all state routes. 
(2)  Off-system highways. 

 
Signs to be erected by the county for all county routes. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 46-31; Ord. No. 050599, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 22-23. - Use of speed detection devices. 
The board of commissioners does hereby approve the use of speed detection devices by the sheriff's department. 
(Code 2005, § 46-32; Res. of 10-5-1981) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-19. - Self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors. 
The board of commissioners pursuant to section 3 of Act No. 1046 enacted by the general assembly during the 1996 session of the legislature (1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, § 3) and signed by the governor on April 25, 1996, does hereby exempt the county from the provisions of such Act codified as O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Code 2005, § 50-31; Res. of 5-14-1996) 
Secs. 24-20—24-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 24-42. - Septic tanks. 
In order to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the county: 
(1)  Septic tank systems shall be prohibited on any property identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as being within the special flood hazard areas inundated by 100-year flood zone A (floodplains); 
(2)  Septic tank systems shall not be installed in a wetlands area without a proper section 404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(3)  Installation of septic tank systems in the groundwater recharge areas of the state (as delineated in Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 18) shall be strictly in accordance with "Rules for Environmental Protection Criteria 391-3-16-.02;" 
(4)  Installation of a septic tank shall be prohibited within 100 feet of the Satilla River and its streams and tributaries. 
(Code 2005, § 50-51; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § II) 
Sec. 24-43. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The implementation and enforcement of this division and restrictions rest with the board of commissioners, and by virtue of this division are hereby expressly delegated to the county board of health. 
(b)  The county board of health is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for ensuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of, and those commercial activities who do business in, the county. 
(c)  The county board of health is directed to implement procedures which will ensure that all persons who may come under this division will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the state. 
(Code 2005, § 50-52; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § III) 
Sec. 24-44. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Violation of these prohibitions and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  Any violator shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 2005, § 50-53; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § IV) 
Sec. 24-45. - Jurisdiction; complaints. 
(a)  The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violators of this division. 
(b)  Complaints of violation of any provision of this division shall be brought before the magistrate's court by a designated representative of the county board of health and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(Code 2005, § 50-54; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § V) 
Appendix A - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Development Code of Pierce County, Georgia as adopted in Ordinance Number 2005-2 on February 1, 2005 and amended through 2016. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule planning and zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interests in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1; Georgia Plat Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Development Code of Pierce County, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 2016, § 101) 
Sec. 102. - Enactment. 
Article IX of The Constitution of the State of Georgia, 1976, grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development: In accordance with the Pierce County/Blackshear/Patterson/Offerman Comprehensive Plan 2010 and in Pursuance of Authority granted by the Georgia Act Number 358, General County and Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, by HB.51 amending title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated to include Chapter 66, "The Zoning Procedures Law" as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly, the board of commissioners of Pierce County, the city council of Blackshear, and the city council of Patterson, Georgia, and the City of Offerman, ordain and enact into law, The Development Code of Pierce County. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 102) 
Sec. 103. - Purpose. 
This Development Code is to provide for the best and maximum use of property promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the people of Pierce County. This Code establishes the administrative agencies and the method of administration, zoning districts with accompanying regulations, minimum design standards for the subdividing of land into streets, alleys and lots, defining certain terms used herein, providing the method of variance and amendment, providing penalties for violation, repealing conflicting ordinances, and for other regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 103) 
Sec. 104. - Objectives. 
These regulations are designed to: 
1.  Conserve and protect the natural, economic, and scenic resources of Pierce County; 
2.  Prevent and reduce the traffic congestion and traffic hazards resulting from poorly designed streets and major traffic arteries; 
3.  Secure safety from fire, panic, structural failure, and other dangers; 
4.  Promote health and general welfare; 
5.  Provide adequate light and air; 
6.  Prevent overcrowding of the land, avoiding undue concentration of population; 
7.  Aid the adequate provision of transportation, parks, schools, sewage, water, and other public requirements; 
8.  Sustain the character of the county and its suitability for particular uses; 
9.  Promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods; 
10.  Protect property from blight and depreciation; 
11.  Secure economy in governmental expenditures; 
12.  Conserve the value of buildings; 
13.  Encourage the most appropriate use of land and buildings within the county; and 
14.  Promote the health, safety, prosperity, and welfare of the citizens of Pierce County. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 104) 
Sec. 105. - Jurisdiction and scope. 
The Development Code shall apply to all areas within the boundaries of Pierce County, including incorporated municipalities, subject to the approval of said municipalities, as provided herein. The scope of this document encompasses and: 
1.  Defines certain terms used herein; 
2.  Utilizes the creation of districts to regulate the uses, location, condition, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings, structures and lands for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, water supply, sanitation, public safety, public activities, preservation of scenic areas, protection against floods, and other purposes; 
3.  Defines the percentage of lot which may be occupied; 
4.  Defines the sizes of yards and other open spaces; 
5.  Regulates the density and distribution of population; 
6.  Establishes minimum design standards for the subdividing of land into streets, alleys, and lots; 
7.  Incorporates eight mandated construction codes for standardized building quality; 
8.  Provides for the method of administration of each Development Code element, appeal and amendment and duties; 
9.  Provides penalties for violations; and 
10.  Enumerates other administrative and regulatory requirements. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 105) 
Sec. 106. - Regulation of land division. 
The legal division of land by deed or transfer of title, except stated exemptions, is regulated by this Code when the following conditions are present: 
1.  The division of land into two or more parcels, lots or tracts; and 
2.  The dedication, vacation, reservation or improvement of any public or private access easement or right-of-way through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 106) 
Sec. 107. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Code are at variance with the requirements of another lawfully adopted rules, regulations, codes, deed restrictions, ordinances, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 107) 
Sec. 108. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this Code be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the Code as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 108) 
Sec. 109. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances of Pierce County, the City of Blackshear, the City of Patterson and the City of Offerman (Pierce County) in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 109) 
Sec. 110. - Effective date. 
This Code shall take effect and be enforced from and after its adoption on February 1, 2005, enacted and ordained by the county board of commissioners, the City of Blackshear, the City of Patterson, and the City of Offerman (either by direct action from the city council or on behalf of by the county board of commissioners). 
(Ord. of 2016, § 110) 
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 201. - Interpretation of terms. 
For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 
2.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and past tense. 
3.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
4.  The word "may" is discretionary. 
5.  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
6.  When the title of code inspector is used, it shall be construed to mean the Community Development, County and/or building department, director, or designee. 
7.  Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 201) 
Sec. 202. - Definitions 
1.  Accessory building : A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main buildings. 
2.  Accessory use : A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
3.  Advertising sign or structure : Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, stone, or other sign, device, or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, [or] structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure other than a sign shall be determined as the area of the largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning, nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or materials being offered for [sale] shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this definition. 
4.  Alley : A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
5.  Apartment house or multi-family dwelling : A dwelling unit designed to be occupied by two or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartment houses, apartments, and flats, but not including auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels. 
6.  Average daily traffic (ADT) : The number of trips generated during a 24-hour period by the total number of residential units having access to the street. Ten trips per day per residential unit shall be used for design purposes in this Code. 
7.  Board : Pierce County joint planning commission/board of appeals. 
8.  Board of appeals: Pierce County joint planning commission. 
9.  Boarding house : A dwelling unit other than a hotel where, for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more unrelated persons. 
10.  Bonds : Any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the affected local government. (All instruments of surety shall be reviewed by the affected local government Attorney and approved by the affected local government wherever a bond is required by these regulations.) 
11.  Buffer : Land area used to visibly separate one land use from another, or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
12.  Building : Any structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. 
13.  Building height : The vertical distance, from the average line of the highest and lowest ground elevations of that portion of the lot covered by the building, to the highest point or the roof or other structure of the building, excluding chimneys, smoke stacks, and other similar venting devices. 
14.  Building line : That line which represents distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street centerline, according to the terms of this ordinance. 
15.  Building official : See community development director. 
16.  Building, principal : A structure in which the primary use of the lot, on which said structure is situated, is conducted. 
17.  Building site : A single parcel of land under one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure. 
18.  Central sewage system : A community sewage system including collection and treatment facilities serving more than one lot in a subdivision. 
19.  Central water system : A community water system including treatment and distribution facilities serving more than one lot in a subdivision. 
20.  Certificate of occupancy : A permit issued by the community development director or designee, stating the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with the Code, or a legal variance has been granted, as provided by this Development Code. 
21.  Club : A building or facilities owned or operated by and for educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily operating rendering a service customarily carried on for gain. 
22.  Cluster housing : Residential development which provides for the grouping of attached and/or detached single-family dwelling units. Lots may be smaller than normally permitted in a land development district, for purposes of preserving open space and natural features of the terrain and promoting economy in providing public facilities and services. Such development shall be limited to not more than four units occupying one structure. 
23.  Community development director : The individual employed to enforce the Pierce County Development Code regulations, perform plat and subdivision development reviews, issue building permits and certificates of occupancy. The director serves as a resource for the Pierce County Board of Commission and the Cities of Blackshear and Patterson regarding issues of zoning, development, code, and ordinances. 
24.  Commission : The joint planning commission of Pierce County, Georgia. 
25.  Conditional exception : A use within certain zoning districts specified by this Code and is not permitted as a matter of right, but may be permitted by meeting the specified requirements and approval of the Pierce County planning commission. A conditional exception is of temporary nature for up to one year. 
26.  Conditional use : A use which is not permitted as a matter of right within the development districts, but is a permitted use upon approval by the Pierce County planning commission. Such a use can be approved if it does not detract or disturb the intended activities for the district in which the proposed use is located. A conditional use, once permitted, is permanent. 
27.  Development : The performance of any construction or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land, or the division of land into two or more parcels, lots, building sites or units. 
28.  Dwelling : Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. 
29.  Dwelling, single-family : A structure designed to be occupied by one family. 
30.  Dwelling, two-family : A structure designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
31.  Dwelling, multi-family : A structure designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels. 
32.  Dwelling unit : One or more rooms within a structure, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment, with provisions for cooking, eating and sleeping, and physically set apart from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure. 
33.  Easement : A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specified purpose or purposes for the general public, corporation or a certain person. 
34.  Fair market value : The value of property or structures, as determined by the County Tax Assessor, either before the improvement was started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
35.  Exception : Any parcel or lot splits greater that five acres shall be exempt from any subdividing regulations, provided that all other regulations set forth in this Code are met. 
36.  Final plat: A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording of that subdivision in accordance with the Plat Laws of the State of Georgia. 
37.  Flag lot: A lot fronting on a public or private street which is reached via an access strip having a minimum frontage and width of 25 feet. A flag lot shall meet all requirements of these regulations. 
38.  Flood or flooding : A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas and/or the unusual and rapid surface water accumulation of runoff from any source. 
a.  Flood plain : The land area subject to inundation by waters of the 100 year flood as delineated by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration. The 100 year flood has a one percent chance of occurring during any given year. Agricultural areas or farms which are adjacent to fresh water courses and which are irrigated by the use of floodgates or other mechanical devices shall be considered to be the part of the Flood Fringe Area rather than the Floodway. 
b.  Flood proofing : A combination of structural and/or non structural additions, changes, adjustments, or provisions to properties or structures subject to flooding which will reduce or eliminate flood damages to properties, water and sewer facilities, structures and contents of buildings. 
c.  Flood fringe area : The area of the flood plain lying outside the floodway, but still lying within the area of special flood hazard, i.e., within the 100 year flood plain. 
d.  Floodway : The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the velocity waters of the regulatory flood. 
e.  Regulatory flood : For purposes of this ordinance, a flood event having a one percent chance of occurring in any given year, although the flood may occur in any year, i.e., the 100 year flood. 
f.  Regulatory flood elevation : The crest elevation in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the regulatory flood at any given point in an area of special flood hazard. 
39.  Home occupation : Any occupation or profession carried on by dwelling unit inhabitants, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for residential purposes, does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings. 
40.  Hotel : A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or camp, sanitarium, hospital asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
41.  Improvements : Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce useable and desirable lots. 
42.  Individual sewage disposal system : A septic tank and seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device for one lot as approved by the county health department. 
43.  Junk yards : An open area where waste, used or secondhand material are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
44.  Kennel, commercial : Any lot, structure or premises where two or more dogs and/or cats are kept for a fee. 
45.  Loading space, off street : Space logically and conveniently located for pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to service, and accessible to such vehicles. 
46.  Local governments : The county commission of Pierce County, Georgia and/or City of Blackshear Council and/or City of Patterson Council. 
47.  Lot : A parcel of land of varying size which is designed as a single unit of property and which is intended to be occupied by one building, or group of buildings, and accessory buildings and uses as required by this Code. A lot is also that portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer or for development, or both. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
a.  Lot, area : The total acreage or square footage included within lot boundaries. 
b.  Lot, corner : A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut, for their full lengths on different streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
c.  Lot, double loaded : A lot with frontage on two streets, at a point other than at their intersection, as distinguished from a corner lot. This configuration is not allowed in new subdivision plats, but shall be accepted if an existing configuration has been recorded. 
48.  Lot of record : An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed, filed in the records of the Clerk of Pierce County Superior Court. 
49.  Lot width : The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this Code; or if no set back line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way lines. 
50.  Master plan : The Development Code and its regulations concerning zoning, land subdivision, and building construction, when combined with the Pierce County Comprehensive Plan, the Tri-County Solid Waste Management Plan, and the Official Land Use Map, form the Master Plan. Other elements and ordinances may be included at the discretion of the Commission. 
51.  Mobile home : A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
b.  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on a flatbed. 
c.  Arriving at the site complete and ready for occupancy and requiring only minor work or assembling before occupancy. 
52.  Mobile home park : A parcel of land which is used or intended to be used for the rent, lease or sale of spaces/lots and the provision of services for two or more mobile homes. 
53.  Mobile home space/lot : A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
54.  Non-conforming use : A structure or parcel of land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the land use district in which it is situated. 
55.  Person : The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, or partnership. 
56.  Plat : A map or drawing upon which the plan of the subdivision is presented for approval. 
57.  Preliminary plat : A tentative subdivision plat, indicating approximate proposed layout of a subdivision submitted with supporting documentation as necessary for consideration and approval prior to preparation of the final plat. 
58.  Private sewage system : A sewage system including collection and treatment facilities that is owned, maintained and operated by a community corporation, landowners association, or the developer serving more than one lot and approved by the state department of natural resources. 
59.  Private water system: A water system, including treatment and distribution facilities, owned, maintained and operated by a community corporation, landowners association, or the developer; serving more than one lot and approved by the state department of natural resources and the county health department. 
60.  Public or community sewage system : Any sewage treatment works, pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations and force mains and all other constructions, devices, and necessary appliances, designed for treating or conducting sewage for ultimate disposal into lakes, streams, estuaries or other bodies of surface water, that is owned, maintained and operated by the County or a municipality and serving more than one lot and approved by the environmental protection division, state department of natural resources. 
61.  Public utility : Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and is furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public the following: natural gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication or water. 
62.  Public water system : A water system including treatment and distribution facilities that is owned, maintained and operated by the County or a municipality serving more than one lot and approved by the environmental protection division, state department of natural resources. 
63.  Reserved strip : A small strip of land between the terminus of a platted street right-of-way and the plat boundary where ownership could be retained by the subdivider which would prevent the extension of said street into adjacent property. 
64.  Right-of-way : A legal right of passage over another person's property, with access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
65.  Right-of-way line : The outside boundaries of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, recorded easement, deed, dedication or by the official right-of-way. 
66.  Screening : A strip of densely planted shrubs or trees at least three feet wide and three feet in height at the time of planting, or a ten foot wide naturally vegetated buffer strip, or an opaque wall or barrier of uniform material at least six feet in height. 
Screening should be maintenance free or set back from the property line to allow access for maintenance. 
67.  Street : Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. Private streets, those access routes which have not been formally dedicated nor are maintained by the County, shall meet the minimum requirements for public streets. 
a.  Arterial streets : Major thoroughfares that are primarily intended for fast or heavy traffic. 
b.  Collector streets : Thoroughfares which carry traffic from lesser roads to arterial streets and highways, and those streets serving industrial and commercial areas, designed to have limited residential frontage. 
c.  Lanes : Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
d.  Marginal access streets : Lesser roads which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
e.  Minor streets : Used primarily for access to abutting residential property and are designed to carry [not] more traffic than that which is generated on the street itself—should be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) volume not greater than 250 for cul-de-sacs and 500 for loop/through streets. 
f.  Sub-collector streets : Those streets which are used for access to abutting residential property and also conduct traffic from minor streets that intersect it. Sub-collector streets should be designed to convey an ADT volume not greater than 1,500. Residential streets that can be used as through streets between collector and arterial streets shall be classified as collector streets. 
68.  Street centerline : The line surveyed and monumented by the governing authority shall be the centerline of a street, or in the event that no centerline has been determined, it shall be that line running midway between, and parallel to the outside right-of-way lines of such streets. 
69.  Street, intersecting : Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
70.  Structure : Any form constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to an object having a location on the ground. Structure does not include walls or fences. 
71.  Structural alterations : Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
72.  Subdivider: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his designated representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the property. 
73.  Subdivision : The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, legacy, gift, or building development; all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. The term includes the re-subdivision of land, and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
74.  Subdivision, major : The division of a tract or parcel of land into ten or more lots, building sites, lease lots, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, legacy, or building development. The term shall include the opening of a new street/road, or a change in existing streets; or divisions of land involving the extension public utilities and includes re-subdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdivision or to the land or area subdivided. 
75.  Subdivision, minor : The division of a tract or parcel of land into five and no more than nine or less lots, building sites, lease lots, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease legacy or building development. The term shall include the opening of a new street/road, or a change in existing streets; or divisions of land involving the extension public utilities and includes re-subdivision and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdivision or to the land or area subdivided. 
76.  Subdivision, non : The division of a tract or parcel of land up to four lots for the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale, lease legacy or building development. 
77.  Use of right : Activities or structures which are in accord with the intent of the district in which they are located. 
78.  Use, principal : The main or primary use for which land or structure is intended. 
79.  Variance : A variance is a property-specific relaxation of the terms of the Development Code, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
80.  Water body : Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, lake, slough, pond, canal, channel, swamp, or marsh in which water stands or flows either continuously or intermittently including any adjacent bank which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or pond water. 
81.  Yard : The open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed except for accessory uses, landscaping, fences, etc. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the least measured distance at grade between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
a.  Yard, front : That portion of all lots located between the outer wall of the principal use or building and the boundary line along the primary transportation access, usually but not limited to that side of the principal building which contains the perceived primary entrance. 
b.  Yard, rear : That portion of all lots, opposite the front yard and divided from the front yard by the principal use or building, which extends the minimum distance from the outer wall of the principal building to the boundary line opposite the front boundary line. 
c.  Yard, side : That portion of all lots, measured as the minimum distance between the outer wall of the principal building and side lines of the lot; side lines usually extend from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 202) 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW 

Sec. 301. - Administrative agencies. 
The administrative agencies of this Code are as follows: 
1.  The Pierce County board of commissioners, and the city councils of Blackshear, Offerman, and Patterson; 
2.  The Pierce County community development department. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 301) 
Sec. 302. - Duties of county board of commissioners. 
It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners to: 
1.  In conjunction with the city councils of Blackshear, Offerman, and Patterson as outlined in Sections 303, 304, 307, and 308, appoint Representatives to the planning commission; 
2.  Delegate the authority to administer this Code to the community development director; 
3.  Delegate authority to the planning commission to render recommendations on variance requests; and 
4.  Approve re-zonings, variances, and other amendments to the Development Code; 
upon the recommendation of the planning commission for matters within the unincorporated areas of Pierce County. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 302) 
Sec. 302(a). - Duties of the City of Blackshear. 
It shall be the duty of the City of Blackshear: 
1.  In conjunction with the Councils of Patterson, Offerman, and the Pierce County board of commissioners as outlined in Sections 303, 304, 307, and 308, to appoint Representatives to the planning commission; 
2.  Delegate the authority to administer this Code to the community development director; 
3.  Delegate authority to the planning commission to render recommendations on variance requests; and 
4.  Approve rezonings, variances, and other amendments to the Development Code upon the recommendation of the planning commission for matters within the city limits of the City of Blackshear. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 302(a)) 
Sec. 302(b). - Duties of the City of Patterson. 
It shall be the duty of the City of Patterson: 
1.  In conjunction with the Councils of Blackshear, Offerman, and the Pierce County board of commissioners as outlined in Sections 303, 304, 307, and 308, to appoint Representatives to the planning commission; 
2.  Delegate the authority to administer this Code to the community development director; 
3.  Delegate authority to the planning commission to render recommendations on variance requests; and 
4.  Approve re-zonings, variances, and other amendments to the Development Code upon the recommendation of the planning commission for matters within the city limits of the City of Patterson. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 302(b)) 
Sec. 302(c). - Duties of the City of Offerman. 
It shall be the duty of the City of Offerman: 
1.  In conjunction with the Councils of Blackshear, Patterson, and the Pierce County board of commissioners as outlined in Sections 303, 304, 307, and 308, to appoint Representatives to the planning commission; 
2.  Delegate the authority to administer this Code to the community development director; 
3.  Delegate authority to the planning commission to render recommendations on variance requests; and 
4.  Approve re-zonings, variances, and other amendments to the Development Code upon the recommendation of the planning commission for matters within the city limits of the City of Offerman. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 302(c)) 
Sec. 303. - Reserved. 
Sec. 304. - Reserved. 
Sec. 305. - Powers of the board of appeals. 
1.  To hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the community development director in the enforcement of any section or article adopted in this Code, when an application for appeal has been filed within 15 days of the action by the community development director. 
2.  To approve variances from the terms of the ordinance or resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest. Such variances may be approved, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions in this Code will result in unnecessary hardship for an individual. In conjunction with the regulations of Section 614 of this Code, such a variance may be recommended if the board of appeals finds that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of the Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar and unique to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the Code, provided that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the Code. 
3.  The board of appeals does not have the power to: 
a.  Amend the Development Code; 
b.  Rezone land; 
c.  Declare any part of this Code invalid; or 
d.  Permit a use prohibited by the Code. 
4.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings, unless the community development director certifies to the board of appeals that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property; upon such certification, the action sought by the community development director shall be instigated immediately and continued until a final decision is rendered by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 305) 
Sec. 306. - Court review of board of appeals. 
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the affected local government may take an appeal to the Superior Court. Said appeals to the Superior Court shall be the same as an appeal to the Superior Court from any decision made by the Court of the Ordinary and as specified in Chapter 6-2 of the Code of Georgia. The appeal must be made to the court within 30 days after the board of appeals decision. Otherwise, its decision is final. Request must be made for a jury trial within 30 days after filing for appeal before the Superior Court. 
Any appeals to the Superior Court shall be governed by the Georgia Administrative Procedures Act. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 306) 
Sec. 307. - Reserved. 
Sec. 308. - Powers and duties of the planning commission. 
1.  Review and recommends updates to the master plan and parts thereof for the development of Pierce County, the City of Blackshear, the City of Offerman, and the City of Patterson; 
2.  Review and grant approval or disapproval of all preliminary and final plats, based on the recommendation of the community development director; 
3.  Authorize or deny the issuance of Conditional Use permits by the community development director as outlined in Section 408; 
4.  Review all rezoning requests and make recommendations of approval or disapproval to the affected local government; 
5.  Review and adopt appropriate recommendations to the Development Code of Pierce County upon the request of the community development director; 
6.  Recommend any actions necessary to implement the strategies of the Pierce County Consolidated Comprehensive Plan; 
7.  Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the planning commission may take an appeal to the affected local government. The appeal must be made to the affected local government within 30 days after the planning county commission decision. Otherwise, its decision is final; and 
8.  Take any action that is not expressed in this section but may be required or stated within the regulations of the Development Code; 
9.  Serve as the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 308) 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS 

Sec. 401. - Building permit. 
It shall be unlawful to begin the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building, including accessory buildings, until the community development director has issued a building permit for such work. 
No building permit for a proposed building site requiring sanitary disposal facilities shall be issued until the applicant has obtained an approval certificate from the Pierce County health department, or public works director and has presented a copy of said certificate to the community development director. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 401) 
Sec. 402. - Site approval and sewage disposal construction permit. 
1.  Application for site approval and sewage disposal construction permit shall be made by filing applicable forms provided by the Pierce County health department. 
2.  Such application shall be made to the health department at least ten days prior to the application for a building permit or beginning construction of an individual sewage disposal system. 
3.  The site approval and sewage disposal system will be based upon requirements of the Georgia State Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, Chapter 270 5-25, adopted under Georgia Laws (Acts 1964, pp. 449, 501), Chapter 88-1 of the 1933 Code of Georgia, as amended. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 402) 
Sec. 403. - Issuance of building permit. 
1.  The applicant shall submit to the community development director a dimensioned sketch or scale plan indicating the shape, size and location of all buildings to be erected, and of any building already on the lot. 
2.  Applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and structures. 
3.  If the proposed work as set forth in the application conforms to the provisions of this Code and the health department has given site approval, the community development director shall issue the building permit upon payment of the required fee. 
4.  If the building permit is refused, the community development director shall give the applicant a written explanation of reasons for the refusal. 
5.  Building permits must be renewed if construction has not begun within six months of the initial date of issue. 
6.  All construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure where the estimated cost of such construction, erection, moving, or alterations is figured to be in excess of $300.00 requires a building permit. 
7.  A building permit shall not be issued until the community development director is certain all construction code regulations have been met. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 403) 
Sec. 404. - Certificate of occupancy. 
1.  No land or building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used until a Certificate of Occupancy has been granted. 
2.  No electric or water utility company, cooperative, or individual shall connect, provide, or furnish service to any mobile home, relocatable structure, new building, or proposed building site until a certificate of occupancy has been signed by the community development director and given to the utility company, cooperative, or individual. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 404) 
Sec. 405. - Requirements for certificate of occupancy. 
To receive a Certificate of Occupancy from the community development director, the following shall be complied with: 
1.  Site approval and construction permits must be attained from the Pierce County health department, and presented to the community development director to: 
a.  Install an approved type sewage disposal system or approval for connection to a central sewage facility; and 
b.  Install an approved type individual water supply or approval for connection to a public water system. 
2.  Upon completion of construction and installation of water supply and sewage facilities, and have been approved by the Pierce County health department, a certificate of approval must be given to the community development director. 
3.  When the certificate of approval for the water and sewage systems have been received, along with an approval recognizing compliance of the construction with the Standard Building, Gas, Mechanical, Plumbing and Fire Prevention Codes, the National Electrical Code, the Georgia State Energy Code, and the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as well as any other codes that may be adopted by Pierce County, then the community development director shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 405) 
Sec. 406. - Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
1.  Upon completion of any work for which a building permit has been granted, application shall be made to the community development director for a Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  Within three business days of application, the community development director shall make a final inspection of the property and shall issue the certificate of occupancy if the work conforms to the necessary regulations. 
3.  If the certificate is refused, the community development director must state such refusal in writing, with the cause. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 406) 
Sec. 407. - Temporary permit. 
The community development director is authorized to issue temporary permits for the following uses. Such permits shall be subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such uses will cause no traffic congestion, and will not adversely affect surrounding areas. Any temporary use not allowed for in this Code shall be requested from the affected local government. 
1.  Carnival or circus, in approved open areas, for a period not to exceed three weeks and subject to approval/disapproval by the board of commissioners. 
2.  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure, in an approved open area, for a period not to exceed 40 days and subject to approval/disapproval by the board of commissioners. 
3.  Open lot sale of Christmas trees and other holiday/seasonal items, in an approved area, for a period not to exceed 45 days. 
4.  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, for a period of 12 months, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. This temporary permit does not need affected municipality approval prior to issuance. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 407) 
Sec. 408. - Conditional uses. 
The uses listed under the various land use districts as "Conditional Uses" are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses makes it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the conditional uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
1.  When applying for a building permit, the applicant shall be informed by the community development director that the proposed use is a Conditional Use. All Conditional Use Permit requests will be referred to the planning commission. 
2.  An application shall be filed with the planning commission no later than 30 days prior to its regularly scheduled meeting. Said application shall show the location or intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners, and existing land uses within 300 feet, and any other material or information pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require. 
3.  The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon, and vote to approve/disapprove such application. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 408) 
ARTICLE V. - PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 501. - Sketch plan. 
Previous to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, a sketch plan may be submitted to the community development director for review and recommendation. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the county health department, prior to submission to the community development director, for review and site approval. When submitted, this sketch plan shall be drawn on a perimeter survey and shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the perimeter survey. It shall include the following information: 
1.  The boundary lines of the property being subdivided; 
2.  Water sources and wetlands found on the tract of land to be subdivided and limits of buildable area; and 
3.  The location, name and right-of-way width of any existing streets on the land to be subdivided, or on land adjacent to the tract of land to be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 501) 
Sec. 502. - Preliminary plat. 
After receiving site approval from the health department and before work shall begin to open a subdivision, five prints of a preliminary plat, showing the proposed design of the subdivision, shall be submitted to the community development director for review and approval by the planning commission. Until the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved by the planning commission, a developer shall not grade, scrape, or otherwise open or extend a street in the proposed subdivision, nor shall he in any other manner cause construction to actually begin in a subdivision. Clearing of underbrush sufficient for purposes of surveying or engineering is permitted. However, land disturbing activities as defined and regulated by the Pierce County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance shall not be performed without first obtaining a permit from the community development director. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 502) 
Sec. 503. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
The original copy of the preliminary plat shall be drawn on transparent tracing material with either black ink or soft pencil and shall be of a size not greater than 18 inches by 24 inches. Such plat shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 200 feet to the inch. The submitted copies of the preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of proposed subdivision; 
Owner and/or subdivider; 
Graphic scale of the plat; 
North arrow; 
Date; 
Size of the tract being subdivided in acres; 
Zoning district; and 
Key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision in the County. 
2.  The bearings and distances of the boundary lines of the property to be subdivided. 
3.  The location of any water bodies, drainage ways, wetlands, and other watercourses which exist on the property. 
4.  When within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision, the distance, direction and size of public waterlines, sanitary sewer lines and storm water sewer lines and/or culverts. 
5.  The name, location, and right-of-way width of existing public or private streets either on the property or on the land adjoining the property. 
6.  The name of the subdivision or property owner adjoining the property and their zoning classification. 
7.  The location of railroads, or public or private easements, and of parks or other public spaces either on the property or adjoining the property. 
8.  Proposed street rights-of-way with width and total length, street names, street markers, traffic control devices and crosswalks. 
9.  Total number of lots, lot lines and lot line dimensions, lot numbers and block numbers or letters and proposed building setback lines. 
10.  The location, purpose and width of any proposed drainage or utility easements. 
11.  Proposed public and/or private recreation sites and/or reserved land. 
12.  The location of proposed monuments and permanent benchmarks. 
13.  Description of method by which sanitary sewage disposal and water supply facilities will be provided. 
14.  A Certificate of Approval of the preliminary plat by the county commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that all the requirements for Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Pierce county commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
This Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the final plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ ." 
____________ 
Chairperson, Pierce County Planning Commission 
15.  All subdivisions, which have frontage on a state highway shall provide for a buffer strip having a minimum width of ten feet to 15 feet depending on topography. The strip will be planted with healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen and shall be two to three feet (2'—3') in height at time of planting and a species that will grow to a height of eight feet (8') or greater. A solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence or vinyl privacy fence not less than six feet (6') in height may be used. In the event that the highway is elevated above the elevation at the right-of-way line adjoining the subdivision, the fence will be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height. The subdivision plat will depict elevations along the perimeter of the subdivision and the highway right-of-way line and center line of the highway at 100 feet intervals. The planted screen shall include trees and shrubbery that will mature to a height in excess of eight feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 503) 
Sec. 504. - Support documentation for preliminary plat. 
That documentation which needs to accompany the preliminary plat: 
1.  Proof of ownership of the site being subdivided and a current tax map and survey of the site. 
2.  Five copies of street construction plans including typical cross sections, proposed profiles and other pertinent construction details. 
3.  Five copies of the grading plan including existing contours of the site in dashed lines and proposed final contours in solid lines at one foot intervals. Elevations shall be based on a spot elevation grid with a maximum of 100 feet between elevation shots. 
4.  If any sanitary sewage disposal or water supply facilities are intended to connect to a public system, planned for public dedication and maintenance or to be connected to a private system, five copies of facility construction plans shall be submitted including the location of fire hydrants, valve boxes, manholes, line sizes, sewer profiles and other pertinent construction details. If individual sewage disposal systems and/or individual wells are to be used, a statement from the county health department indicating its policy and any limitations on the use of individual sewage disposal systems in the area to be subdivided shall be submitted. If the statement from the health department indicates severe limitations, engineering measures designed to render such land suitable for such systems shall be submitted by the developer. If no engineering remedies for such limitations as outlined by the health department are available, the preliminary plat shall be denied approval by the planning commission. 
5.  Five copies of the street and lot drainage plan for the subdivision including all pertinent construction details with certificate of three year street or road maintenance by the developer attached. 
6.  A copy of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control permit issued by the community development director. 
7.  Five copies of a soil survey map identifying the subdivision boundaries, lot layout and the soil series for that area. 
8.  When the preliminary plat includes only a part of phase of the tract in which the subdivider has an interest; the subdivider shall submit a tentative street plan for all of said tract, which shall serve for city/county review purposes only. 
9.  The preliminary plat and all supporting documentation shall be prepared by a registered engineer and/or registered land surveyor within the limits of their authority under applicable Georgia Laws and shall bear their seal and signature. 
10.  A copy of construction permit from the appropriate government agency if all or any portion of the subdivision is in a wetland. 
Note— See Sections 609, 1102, 1119, 1121, 1123, 1124, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 504) 
Sec. 505. - Filing the preliminary plat application. 
1.  The preliminary plat application, preliminary plat and all supporting documentation shall be filed with the community development director at least 30 days prior to the planning commission's meeting at which the plat is to be considered. 
2.  At the time of application, all materials will be checked to ensure that a complete application has been filed. Only complete applications will be accepted. 
3.  For all applications meeting this deadline, the staff will forward the preliminary plat and supporting documentation to the appropriate city/county departments and other agencies for their review and comment. Within 15 days following the application submission, the staff shall send out written notification to the applicant of any additional plat and support documentation or changes necessary. 
4.  The applicant shall have seven days from the date that the notification was sent out in which to provide the required changes. Those applicants that do not resubmit the required changes by the deadline date will not have their preliminary plat placed on the planning commission's agenda for that month. The staff shall assemble submitted plans, comments and any subsequent changes into a comprehensive report for presentation to the planning commission on the established meeting date. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 505) 
Sec. 506. - Reserved. 
Sec. 507. - Planning commission review. 
Except where an extension of time is authorized by the applicant for the preliminary plat review, the planning commission shall have 45 days from the date that the preliminary plat is filed to approve or disapprove such plat, otherwise the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand subject to the approval of the municipality or county commission whichever jurisdiction that the property may be located. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 507) 
Sec. 508. - Preliminary plat approval. 
When a developer receives approval of the preliminary plat showing the design of his proposed subdivision and all imposed conditions requiring action prior to construction have been properly addressed, he may proceed with the construction of the subdivision provided all required permits have been issued. Such construction shall conform with the design and plan submitted to and approved by the planning commission. The developer shall notify the community development director when construction of any improvements has commenced and during all stages of development. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 508) 
Sec. 509. - Expiration of preliminary plat approval. 
If streets have not been opened or a final plat filed for a subdivision which has been granted preliminary approval within 12 months of such approval, then the plat of such subdivision shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 509) 
Sec. 510. - Final plat. 
Before a plat of a subdivision is recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court of Pierce County and title to the lots thereon are conveyed, five prints of a final plat showing the final design of the subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for review. Until a final plat of a subdivision has been submitted to, reviewed and approved by the planning commission and approved (signed) by the appropriate local official (i.e., commission chairperson or mayor pursuant to where the property is located), the clerk of the superior court of Pierce County shall not record the plat of such subdivision, nor shall the owner or agent of such subdivision transfer title to any lot within the subdivision by reference to the subdivision plat. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval in contiguous phases, each satisfying all requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 510) 
Sec. 511. - Final plat requirements. 
The original copy of the final plat shall be drawn on a not larger than 18 inch by 24 inch sheets of linen, vellum or Mylar reproduction material with black India ink at a scale of not smaller than 200 feet to the inch. Where necessary, the final plat may be several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of subdivision; 
Owner and/or subdivider; 
Graphic scale of the plat; 
North arrow; 
Date; 
Total number of lots; 
Total area of the tract being subdivided in acres; 
Total area of the rights-of-way in acres; 
Total area of the lots in acres; 
Minimum lot size; 
Zoning district; and 
Key map showing the location of the subdivision in the County. 
2.  Primary control points and/or the subdivision corner tie to which all dimensions, bearings or angles and similar data on the plat shall be referred. All subdivision plats shall show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the subdivision as per the Georgia Plat Act. If a National Geodetic Survey triangulation station with accessible reference marks is within 2,000 feet of any point on the subdivision boundary or any point of reference shown thereon, at least two permanent monuments within the subdivision shall show State Plane Coordinates. 
3.  Location of all monuments, iron pins and permanent benchmarks. Monuments shall be placed at all block intersection points, points of curvature and points of tangency of all rights-of-way. Iron pins shall be placed at all angle points and other lot corners of the subdivision. Monuments shall be made of reinforced concrete at least 2.5 inches in diameter or 2.5 inches square, 30 inches long, with flat top containing a one half inch minimum diameter rebar scored with an indented cross to properly identify the location. Monuments shall be installed following completion of all improvements and shall be identified on the final plat. At least two permanent benchmarks shall be established within a subdivision or in each phase of a subdivision and located so that no lot is more than 1,000 feet from a benchmark. Permanent benchmarks shall be placed in the following locations: 
a.  In paved streets, offset from the centerline approximately halfway between the centerline and the pavement edge in a cast iron "water main valve" type box with an adjustable cover flush to the pavement. 
b.  In permanent open space areas or parks. 
c.  Other locations as approved by the city/county engineer. All benchmarks shall be identified on the final plat with location, elevations and reference to the source of original elevation with all pertinent data. If the final plat is approved and recorded prior to the completion of all improvements, a reproducible Mylar copy of the final plat shall be submitted to the community development director with the benchmark data following the completion of all improvements. The community development director will maintain files for benchmark data. 
4.  Tract boundary lines; right-of-way lines of streets, easement and other right-of-way lines and property lines of all lots shall be shown with surveyed dimensions, bearings and other data required by the Georgia Plat Act to enable a mathematical closure of the tract and each lot. All bearings shall be represented in degrees, minutes and seconds and referenced to the principal meridian. 
5.  All plats shall show the closure precision of the data shown on the plat. Closure precision shall not be less than one foot in 10,000 feet. 
6.  A statement shall indicate the type of field equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements shown on the plat. 
7.  Name and width of right-of-way of each street. Streets shall be identified as either public or private. 
8.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easement. 
9.  Number or letter to identify each lot, block or site. 
10.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. "See section 503 paragraph 15." 
11.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
12.  Names of recorded subdivisions and record owners of unplatted land adjoining the property. 
13.  If all or any portion of the subdivision is within the 100 year flood boundary the following statement shall appear on the plat: 
Review of the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map with community panel number ____________ for Pierce County, Georgia indicates that all or portions of this subdivision lies within the 100 year Flood Hazard Area. 
14.  The following certificates shall appear on the final plat when applicable: 
a.  Certificate of Ownership and Dedication. 
It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, rights-of-way, easements and other sites to the use of the public forever or for private use as noted. 
This is the day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Owner(s) 
b.  Certificate of Accuracy. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law. 
This is the day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Registered Land Surveyor No. 
c.  Certificate of Compliance and Approval of Required Improvements and/or Performance Bond. 
It is hereby certified that I, as designated official or engineer for Pierce County, Georgia, have examined this plat and that it complies in form with the requirements of the Code to regulate the making of surveys and filing for record of plats of subdivisions within the County of Pierce, Georgia. Furthermore, it is hereby certified that streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the affected local government's specifications and standards of the Development Code, and/or that the posted performance bond is in an amount sufficient to guarantee the required improvements. 
This is the day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Pierce County Engineer or Designated Official 
d.  Certificate of Approval by the Planning Commission. 
Pursuant to the Development Code of Pierce County, Georgia, all requirements have been fulfilled and this plat is approved. 
This is the day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Chairperson of the Pierce County planning commission 
e.  Certificate of Acceptance by the board of commissioners/city council. 
It is hereby certified that the city council/board of commissioners, Pierce County, Georgia has officially accepted this plat. 
This is the day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Chairperson, Pierce County board of commissioners/mayor, city council 
Subdivisions having unpaved streets shall include in the Certificate of Acceptance by the affected local government the statement that 'The Affected Local Government' will not assume any obligation for paving or surfacing any unpaved minor streets shown on this Plat and the paving of any street in the subdivision will be at the abutting property owner or owner's expense. The developer of said subdivision shall assume liability for acceptable road and or street conditions within the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 511) 
Sec. 512. - Support documentation for final plat. 
Supporting documentation shall be provided with the final plat: 
1.  A print of the final plat with the address numbering system as approved by the community development director. 
2.  The final plat and all "as-built" engineering drawings shall bear the seal of a registered land surveyor and a registered engineer if the subdivision is required to have paved streets. 
3.  The final plat at the time of application shall be accompanied by a certification statement attesting to the approval of the water supply system and/or waste disposal system. Said certification shall be issued by the county health department. If an individual water supply or sewage disposal system is to be used, a certification statement from the county health department stating that the proposed subdivision conforms to the applicable sanitary regulations is required. Substandard lots which have not been modified to conform to said regulations shall be so designated on the final plat. Any exceptions, modifications, or instructions by the health department shall be so noted on the plat. 
4.  Letter from the city/county engineer certifying that all improvements have been satisfactorily completed. If improvements have not been satisfactory completed a performance bond will be estimated by the developers engineer, and recommended by the city/county engineer in an amount determined as being sufficient to secure the installation of such improvements. The performance Bonds shall be approved by the planning commission and the board of county commissioners or city council. 
5.  Deed for dedication of streets, rights-of-way, public utilities, easements and parks if improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
6.  Copy of deed restrictions for the subdivision, if they exist. 
7.  Deed for Road if it is to be turned over to city/county for ownership. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 512) 
Sec. 513. - Additional documentation. 
At the time of application for final plat approval all applicants shall be required to submit the following: 
1.  Certification from the city/county engineer that the streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner by the applicant and according to the specifications and standards of these regulations and other ordinances along with a certification from the developer of the assumption of liability for acceptable street and/or road condition for a period of three years from date of application. 
2.  If the required improvements have not been completed the applicant may upon the approval of the designated official of the affected local government post a bond, certified check, or appropriate letter of credit, herein after called a "bond". 
3.  Such bond amount shall be estimated by the applicant's registered engineer and be approved by the county engineer as sufficient to secure to Pierce County or affected local government, the satisfactory installation of all required improvements or the uncompleted portion thereof. Performance bonds shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city/county attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. Such bonds shall be approved by the board of commissioners or affected local government, as to amount and surety and other conditions deemed satisfactory. 
4.  The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the affected local government in the resolution approving the final plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not exceed two years from the date of final approval. The community development director may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the affected local government at a public meeting, extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one additional year. The County may at any time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the city/county attorney. 
5.  In completion of the construction of improvements, if any changes were made to the engineering plans submitted with the preliminary plat, the development engineer shall prepare and furnish to the county engineer or city public works director, at the time of application for final plat approval "as-built" drawings of all facilities constructed. The development engineer shall certify by his seal and signature that the completed facilities as shown on the "as-built" drawing were constructed according to approved plans and specifications. 
6.  Upon receipt of the Certification from the city/county engineer and Certification from the developers engineer that the improvements have been constructed in accordance to the approved plans and following an inspection finding them to be acceptable, the planning commission shall recommend accepting dedication of required land and or improvements to be deeded to the county and release of performance bond. After the county attorney has examined the title status of the improvements and determined that they are free and clear of any liens and encumbrances the board of commissioners/city council shall accept the improvements for dedication and release the performance bond. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public utilities, easements, and parks shall be by deed to the Pierce County board of commissioners and/or city council. 
7.  Where a bond has been posted and approved for a subdivision through final plat approval, the extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by delivery vehicles, prospective lot or homeowners and by police and fire equipment prior to issuance of a building permit. 
8.  No certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the improvements, and dedication of same, to the affected local government and their subsequent approval of the final subdivision plat. 
9.  A complete final plat application shall be filed with the community development director. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 513) 
Sec. 514. - Final plat approval. 
1.  If the community development director finds that all the requirements of this Code have been met, the final plat shall be submitted to the planning commission and regarding their recommendation of approval or denial then submitted to the affected local government as an agenda item for its next regular meeting for final approval. If the community development director finds that all the requirements of this Code have not been met, specific deficiencies shall be reviewed with the applicant and a period of time not to exceed 90 days shall be given to the applicant to correct the deficiencies. 
2.  If the applicant fails to take corrective action, the community development director shall disapprove the final plat application, stating the reasons for such disapproval in writing. However, if deficiencies are satisfactorily corrected by the applicant, the community development director shall recommend approval of the plat, the planning commission shall consider the final plat at its next regular meeting, and if approved, the final plat shall be submitted to the affected local government for final acceptance and signature. 
3.  Except when an extension of time is authorized by the applicant for final plat review or in the case of deficiencies in the submission additional time is needed, the community development director shall have 30 days from the date of the submission of a final plat to take action. Unless such action is taken within such 30 day period, the plat shall be deemed to have received the recommendation of the community development director. 
4.  The recommendation by the community development director of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the affected local government of any street, utility, easement, or park shown on such plat. Once the final plat has been recommended for approval by the community development director and approved by the affected local government, the local government shall at their next regular meeting vote to accept and officially sign such plat and accept any public dedications if all certifications have been made and all legal documents are in order or vote to deny the final plat. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 514) 
Sec. 515. - Subdivisions (major, minor and non). 
Dividing or sub-dividing parcels or lots shall meet the following: 
1.  Major Subdivisions: 
a.  Meet definition requirements as described in Section 202. 
b.  Dedicated road, street and other easements to meet Sections 1122 through 1136 concerning design standards. 
c.  Submit required fees as described in Section 1404. 
d.  All major subdivisions must meet the requirements for approval as described in Article V Sections 501 through 514. 
2.  Minor Subdivisions: 
a.  Meet definition requirements as described in Section 202. 
b.  Dedicated road, street and other easements to meet the requirements of Sections 1122 through 1136 concerning design standards. 
c.  Submit required fees as described in Section 1404. 
d.  All minor subdivisions must meet the requirements for approval as described in Article V Sections 501 through 514. 
3.  Non Subdivisions: 
a.  Meet definition requirements as described in Section 202. 
b.  Private access easements if applicable, shall meet the requirements of Section 1130. 
c.  Submit required fees as described in Section 1404. 
d.  The community development director shall approve an accurate plat that meets standards based on other code regulations. Non subdivision plats shall be approved within ten business days of submittal as provided. If plat standards are not met, the director shall notify owner in writing. 
4.  Subdivisions (Major/Minor) in (AF) Agriculture-Forestry District: 
Landowners/developers requesting a subdivision in an (AF) Agriculture-Forestry District shall submit an application and fees along with a preliminary plat of proposed subdivision. The minimum lot size for any proposed subdivision in this district shall not be less than two acres. The Pierce County joint planning commission shall review and submit its recommendation to the affected governing municipality. Preliminary and final subdivision plats shall meet approval as described in Article V Sections 501 through 514. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 515) 
Sec. 516. - Re-subdivision of land. 
For any change in an approved and recorded subdivision plat or any map or plat legally reached prior to and after the adoption of this Development Code, if such change affects any street layout, right-of-way, easement, improvement, area reserved for public use or any lot line shown on such plat, such change shall be approved by the planning commission as follows: 
1.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which alter or change in any way the street and/or public utility layout of said plat shall be submitted for preliminary and final plat approval in accordance with this Code. 
2.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which involves the dedication of land for public use, rights-of-way or easements but not streets, public utilities or other improvements shall be submitted for final plat approval in accordance with this Code. 
3.  Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which significantly alter or change any lot or lot line in which each resultant lot meet the minimum requirements of the Code. 
4.  Procedural Requirements: 
a.  An accurate plat or survey meeting the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act, prepared by a registered land surveyor (bearing his seal and signature), depicting the lot and/or lots affected by the proposed re-division thereof shall be submitted to the planning commission. This plat shall also include a general location map, identification of adjoining property owners, statement as to whether the property is within the 100 year Flood Hazard Area and identification of any required (by county engineer) drainage and easements. 
b.  The plat shall be accompanied by a completed application, ownership certification and agent authorization form. 
c.  A lot split of a platted lot in which each resultant lot meets the minimum requirements of this Code: No lot split shall be permitted in a recorded subdivision zoned single-family or multi-family residential with lots containing one acre or less. A notification sign shall be placed on affected property in said subdivision no less than 15 business days prior to the planning commission monthly meeting. Lot splits shall be submitted to the planning commission for preliminary and final plat approval and if granted, said re-division of property shall be certified by signatures of the planning commission chairperson and the community development director. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 516) 
Sec. 517. - Vacation of plats. 
1.  Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein by filing with the planning commission at least 15 days prior to the planning commission's meeting at which it is to be considered, a written instrument to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
2.  Such an instrument shall be approved by the planning commission in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The board of commissioners or city council may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys. 
3.  Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivision; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
4.  When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner therein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 517) 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS, EXEMPTIONS, INTERPRETATIONS, RE-ZONINGS, AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 601. - Authority to amend the Development Code. 
1.  The board of commissioners may amend the regulations, restrictions, boundaries or any provision of this Code subject to the approval of any affected municipality. 
2.  No amendment shall become effective until it is first reviewed by and introduced by the planning commission or county commission, then submitted for approval by the affected local governments. All amendments are subject to the approval of any affected municipality. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 601) 
Sec. 602. - Initiation of amendments. 
1.  An amendment may be initiated by the board of commissioners or the planning commission by the introduction of a resolution, or by an official, board, or other person by presentation of a petition to the county commission. 
2.  A map amendment [rezoning] may be initiated by the owner of the property proposed for rezoning by filing an application with the community development director and paying the appropriate fee. Re-application for rezoning may not be heard for six months from the date of prior planning commission/board of commissioners action. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 602) 
Sec. 603. - Application for amendments. 
1.  The amendment application form shall be obtained from the community development director. The completed application shall be filed with the community development director and the clerk of any affected local government including the municipalities of Blackshear, Offerman and Patterson at least 20 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the request will be heard. Any recommendation purporting to be an application for amendment shall be regarded as mere notice of intent to seek an amendment, until such time as it is the proper application is filed. 
1[2].  Applications for a rezoning shall contain all of the following information: 
a.  A plot plan or survey showing existing and proposed structures and uses on the parcel to be rezoned and the surrounding parcels of land; 
b.  A list of all adjacent property owners (immediate and directly across rights-of-way); 
c.  Access drives; 
d.  Parking and loading areas; 
e.  Easements; 
f.  Utilities; and 
g.  Any other supporting documentation as required by the community development director, county commission or affected local governments. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 603) 
Sec. 604. - Site development plan for rezoning. 
Applications to rezone property to SF, MF, MHP, NC, C, I, LI, PUD, or PI shall be accompanied by a detailed site development plan containing the following elements, in addition to the ones listed in Section 503: 
1.  Plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot to be rezoned; 
2.  Location and dimension of existing structures, rights-of-way, swamplands, boundaries, watercourses, and other water bodies; 
3.  Location and dimensions of proposed development, including structures, types of uses, setbacks, etc.; 
4.  Location and dimension of proposed recreational areas and buffer zones, if any; 
5.  Location and size of water, sewer, and drainage facilities; 
6.  In the case of residential developments, the proposed number of dwelling units and net acres available for construction; and 
7.  In the case of commercial and industrial developments, the proposed off-street parking and loading areas, signage, and outdoor lighting. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 604) 
Sec. 605. - Reserved. 
Sec. 606. - Public hearing and planning commission review. 
1.  Upon the introduction of a petition to amend the text of this Code or upon receipt of an application to amend the Official Zoning Map, the community development director shall publish not less than twice, at least 15 days prior to the meeting, in a local newspaper of general circulation in Pierce County: 
a.  Said notice of the request for an amendment shall contain the location of the Property, date, time and place for the public hearing to be held by the planning commission, along with the present and proposed zoning classifications. 
b.  The public shall be further notified by posting on the subject property in a conspicuous location a sign containing the date, time and place of public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification. The property shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing. 
2.  The planning commission shall submit its recommendation to the Pierce County board of commissioners or the city councils of Blackshear, Offerman and/or Patterson depending on which is the appropriated political jurisdiction. Such review shall be conducted according to the following: 
a.  All papers and other data submitted by the applicant on behalf of the amendment request shall be transmitted to the planning commission. 
b.  All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. At a meeting, any party may appear in person, or be represented by an agent or an attorney. 
c.  No member of the planning commission shall vote on a matter in which he has any pecuniary or special interest, and no staff member may represent an individual applicant or party. 
d.  The planning commission, at a regular meeting, shall review the request and prepare a report, including its recommendation, for transmittal to the responsible authority for action. 
e.  Following action by the planning commission, all papers and data pertinent to the application shall be transmitted to the responsible authority for action. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 606) 
Sec. 607. - Final action on proposed amendments. 
1.  The amendment shall be approved by the planning commission if it fails to take action within 60 days after the public hearing at which the proposed amendment was heard. Action shall mean to approve, disapprove, or to table the proposed amendment for action by the board of commissioners or city council. 
2.  If the proposed amendment is disapproved by the planning commission, it shall require a majority approval of the entire board of commissioners/city council to make the amendment effective. 
3.  Following the final action by the board of commissioners/city council on a rezoning, any necessary changes to the Official Zoning Map shall be made by the community development director. He shall also maintain a written record of the type and date of such changes. 
4.  Any amendment to the text of this ordinance or the official zoning maps regarding this ordinance shall be subject to the approval of any affected local government within Pierce County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 607) 
Sec. 608. - Standards to make zoning decisions. 
To be used by the planning commission and the responsible authority when they are deciding on zoning or rezoning requests: 
1.  Whether the proposed change would permit a use that is suitable, in light of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
2.  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the improvement or development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations. 
3.  Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in the adjacent area. 
4.  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
5.  Whether the proposed change has the potential to cause undue strain on existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
6.  The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan adopted by all incorporated governments in Pierce County. 
7.  Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to an individual owner as contrasted with the public welfare. 
8.  Any other factors relevant to balancing the promotion of public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of private property. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 608) 
Sec. 609. - Exemptions. 
The following types of plat adjustments shall not be defined as subdivisions and shall be exempted from the procedural requirements of this Code: 
1.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this Code; 
2.  The subdivision of a tract of land into (4) or more lots, each having an area of five acres or more, and does not require right-of-way dedication to the county for maintenance or a new roadway; 
3.  The sale of land to the State of Georgia or any political subdivision thereof; 
4.  Railroad right-of-way; 
5.  Plats of such above exceptions shall be received as information by the planning commission, which shall indicate such on the plats; 
6.  The subdivision of land for, and the sale of, cemetery lots; 
7.  Mere alignment of property lines for agricultural or other nonsubdivision purposes; 
8.  The division of property by an estate to its heirs; and 
9.  In the case of conflict between this section, Exemption, and Jurisdiction and Application, the terms provided by this section shall control. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 609) 
Sec. 610. - Exemptions from paving requirements. 
1.  Any subdivision created in the county jurisdiction that joins a paved road, zoned (SF) Single-Family and is more than five lots shall be paved. Subdivisions created that joins a county maintained dirt road/street can be exempt under tab (2) of this amendment. If developer/owner chooses to pave any street/road, it shall meet the requirements of Article XI of this Code for design standards. 
2.  Subdivisions containing not more than 12 residential lots or a total road length of 1,800 feet may be exempt from the paving requirements of this Code provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Minimum lot size and width shall be in accordance with zoning district; 
b.  The subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision or extension until the street is paved in accordance with approved design standards; and 
c.  The paving of any street in the subdivision will be at the abutting property owner's expense. 
3.  All roads/streets in future subdivisions located in the jurisdiction of Blackshear and Patterson shall be paved. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 610) 
Sec. 611. - Exceptions to front yard setback requirements. 
The front yard requirements of this Code shall not apply to any lot where the average front yard on already built upon lots located within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the land development district and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such a lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setback be less than ten feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 611) 
Sec. 612. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
The height limitations of this Code shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, roof signs, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, silos, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, masts and aerials. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 612) 
Sec. 613. - Official zoning map interpretation. 
1.  The community development director shall provide interpretations of the official zoning map. 
2.  In case of any question as to the location of any boundary line between zoning districts, a request for interpretation of the official zoning map may be made of the planning commission and such determination shall be made by the planning commission. 
3.  All decisions rendered in this regard by the planning commission shall be based upon the criteria set forth in Section 802 of this Development Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 613) 
Sec. 614. - Variances. 
Variances shall be permitted as follows, subject to the approval of the planning commission: 
1.  In general, when a peculiar shape, or the topography of a tract of land, or other unusual condition, makes it impractical for a lot owner or subdivider to comply with the literal interpretations of the design requirements of this Code, the board of appeals shall be authorized to vary such requirements, provided, however that in so doing the intent and purposes of this Code are not violated. 
2.  The conditions for approving any variances by the board of appeals may include such conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of these regulations, including: 
a.  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the owners of property since enactment of this Code have had no control. 
b.  The variance is necessary to provide the applicant the same basic property rights that other property owners in the same zone or vicinity possess. 
c.  The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this Code, or to property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of any county plan or policy. 
d.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. 
3.  The procedure for a petition for any such variance shall include: 
a.  A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the community development director. All applications must be filed a minimum of four weeks prior to the board of appeals meeting where the request will be heard. 
b.  The board of appeals shall hold one or more public hearings thereon, which may be part of their regular monthly meetings. 
c.  The board of appeals shall approve, disapprove or table the variance request. 
Action by the board of appeals is final. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 614) 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 701. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city/county attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 701) 
Sec. 702. - Violations. 
Violations of this Code include: 
1.  The owner or agent for the owner of any land to be subdivided within the County who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the community development director, planning commission, board of commissioners or the city council and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Pierce County; 
2.  Uses metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale or transfer of land with the intent of evading these regulations; 
3.  Construction or placing of any structure or any land disturbing activities described in this Code without prior approval from the community development director, planning commission and board of commissioners or affected local government. 
4.  Any other direct violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 702) 
Sec. 703. - Penalties. 
1.  Upon conviction of violations in Section 702, the violating party or parties shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor by law. 
2.  Any person violating any provisions of this Code shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each violation and it shall be considered a separate violation for each day that the violation continues. 
3.  In case any building, structure, or land is used, erected, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this Code, on the advice of the community development director in concurrence with the magistrate judge or municipal court judge, is hereby authorized to seek to have the judge issue a citation or the city/county attorney shall petition for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate legal action to prevent the use of the building, structure, or land. Said citation to be delivered by the community development director or code inspector, or duly authorized law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 703) 
Sec. 704. - Other penalties. 
Unless a subdivision hereafter established shall be designed, developed, and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this Code, then: 
1.  The city/county shall not accept the dedication of any street within such subdivision, nor shall the County improve, maintain, grade, pave, or light any street within such subdivision unless such street or streets shall have received the status of public streets prior to the adoption of this Code. 
2.  The city/county shall not assume any responsibility for drainage problems within such subdivision unless city/county owned and maintained drainage structures already exist in such subdivision. 
3.  The community development director shall not issue a building permit within such subdivision. 
4.  No unit of local government shall be authorized to extend any publicly operated service or utility into such subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 704) 
Sec. 705. - Maintenance of property. 
1.  Motor vehicles: Except as provided for in other regulations, not more than three currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, repairs or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. 
Exceptions: 
a.  A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
b.  Property zoned General Industrial and be in compliance with Section 1015. 
2.  Accumulation of Materials: Accumulation of rubbish, garbage, trash, debris, tires, refuse, appliances, furniture, refrigerators, salvage farm equipment, vacant, abandoned or unregistered manufactured homes and other materials shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate on the exterior of property or premises. Items listed above, not hazardous to the health and safety of the public, are exempt, if on property zoned Agriculture-Forestry and not visible from a public or private street or road. Any items on property zoned Agriculture-Forestry that are a health hazard or safety hazard to the public will be subject to this section. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Unused or salvage farm equipment on property zoned Agriculture-Forestry. 
3.  Upon investigation of any property, which is found to contain any items listed under item 2, the Pierce County community development director or designee will issue a warning to the owner. This warning will consist of: 
a.  Copy of the Ordinance; 
b.  An explanation of the detrimental characteristics of the items found; 
c.  Recommended action to remedy the public health or public safety hazard; 
d.  Notice to the owner stating compliance action must be initiated within 15 days; 
e.  The Community Development or his designee shall present to owner a reasonable period to remedy the violation but shall not exceed 45 days. 
4.  If the violation has not been initiated or corrected by the owner to remove the items on the property, the following action shall be taken: 
a.  Issue a citation to the owner. 
b.  Assess a fine no more than $500.00 or 30 days in jail or both as deemed by the Pierce County Magistrate Court System. 
5.  The community development director, or his designee, or any other person authorized to enforce this article and any duly authorized law enforcement officer shall be empowered to enter any property at [a] reasonable time to inspect any condition of any property, lot within the jurisdiction of Pierce County. 
Exception: Cities of Blackshear and Patterson have adopted unlawful nuisance ordinances; therefore code section 705 does not apply to these municipalities. Blackshear Ordinance #34-91 through #34-102. Patterson Ordinance #2015-004. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 705) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ZONING DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 801. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
For the purpose of these regulations, all portions of Pierce County, Georgia, are hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 

 
(Ord. of 2016, § 801) 
Sec. 802. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply: 
1.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or highway center lines, or street or highway right-of-way lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
2.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
3.  Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center lines or right-of-way lines of streets, or the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto at the scaled distance indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following swamp area lines shall be construed to follow the low water mark of said swamp lines, and in the event of change, the boundary line shall be construed as moving with the actual low water line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of fresh water rivers, creeks, canals, lakes, inlets or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
6.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, the community development director shall interpret the district boundaries. 
7.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was a single ownership at the time of passage of this Code, the planning commission may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 75 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
8.  It is the policy of the planning commission that all Fresh Water swamp areas fall within the Parks/Recreation/Conservation District. Where a boundary is indicated as following such Fresh Water swamp area the boundary line shall be construed as following the actual limits of said swamp area. 
9.  If the county health department requires a larger lot or parcel area than is ordinarily required by the regulations of this Code, the larger lot/parcel area requirement of the health department shall be the minimum lot size. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 802) 
Sec. 803. - Intent of zoning districts. 
The regulations set by this Code within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly, and to each class or kind of structure or land, except when modifications are provided. 
1.  The Agriculture/Forestry (AF) or Multi-Family (MF) zoning districts located in the City of Blackshear and the City of Patterson shall not allow manufactured homes to be placed within these jurisdictions. 
Exception: Modular Office Buildings. 
a.  Churches and Synagogues for education purposes only and not for worship. 
Approval for these facilities will have to meet all Zoning District regulations and requirements for the land/parcel that said buildings are to be placed within affected municipality. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 803) 
ARTICLE IX. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 901. - Agriculture/Forestry District (AF). 
Predominant activities in this category are active farming and timber production, with notable exceptions. 
1.  District Intent: To dedicate land for the farming (such as farmsteads, fields, lots, livestock production, pastures, poultry, specialty farms, etc.), aquaculture, or commercial timber or pulpwood production and harvesting. This district is also created to assist in the conservation of natural resources by encouraging practices which will conserve soil and water resources. Utilities other than electricity and telephone should be provided by the land user in order to discourage the costly extension of public water supply and sewage disposal facilities. Residential Subdivisions are allowed in this district, subject to requirements in Section 515 tab (4). 
2.  Uses of Right: 
Property and buildings in the Agriculture/Forestry District shall be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Dwelling structure for farm owner, family, or employee (including mobile homes); 
b.  All agricultural or forestry land uses, buildings and activities; 
c.  Churches, synagogues, other places of worship; 
d.  Cemeteries; 
e.  Tree farms; 
f.  Riding stables; 
g.  Home occupations; 
h.  Parks, playgrounds, other recreation areas; 
i.  Country clubs, golf courses; 
j.  Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges; 
k.  Kennels, Commercial; and 
l.  Accessory buildings and structures (see Section 1001) 
m.  Roadside stands for farm produce. 
3.  Conditional Uses: 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
a.  Public buildings and utilities; 
b.  Stadiums or race tracks; 
c.  Radio or television stations, and towers; 
d.  Airfields; 
e.  Communication towers; 
f.  Assisted living homes; 
g.  Adult day care centers; 
h.  Plant Nursery; 
i.  Daycare centers. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the Agriculture/Forestry District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: one acre. 
b.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 150 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 40 feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard, setback from street/property line: 40 feet. 
e.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 40 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 20 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
1.  Setbacks for manufactured homes & site built homes in this district shall confirm to the following min. requirements for one and two acre tracts only: 
a.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 40 feet. 
b.  Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet from property line, 25 feet from road or street. 
c.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 15 feet. 
5.  Sign regulations: 
a.  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
b.  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or business identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding 20 square feet in area. Such sign shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
c.  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in Article XIII. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 901) 
Sec. 902. - Single-family Residential District (SF). 
1.  District Intent: This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities needed to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the single-family residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
2.  Uses of Right: Property and buildings in a Single-family Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Single-family residences, not including mobile homes; 
b.  Churches, synagogues, other places of worship and cemeteries; 
c.  Accessory buildings and structures (See Section 1001); and 
d.  General purpose farm or garden, excluding poultry or other non-household animals. 
e.  Home occupations provided the conditions of Section 1014 are met. Exception: Home occupations will not be allowed in subdivisions or parcels where land covenants will not permit such a use as established by owner/developer. 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Public and private schools; 
b.  Parks or playgrounds; 
c.  Country clubs, golf courses; 
d.  Libraries, museums, nonprofit institutions; 
e.  Day care centers or kindergartens; 
f.  Lodge halls; 
g.  Public buildings and utilities; and 
h.  Adult day care centers. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the Single-family Residential District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
1.  With both public/community water and public/community sewerage system: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  With either public/community water, or public/community sewerage system: ½ acre or 21,780 square feet. 
3.  With private well and individual sewage disposal system: one acre or 43,560 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 
150 feet-1 acre tract or parcel with well and septic system. 
125 feet-one half acre tract or parcel with municipal/community water and Individual septic system. 
100 feet-municipal water and sewer. 
c.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 30 feet from property line. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet from street and 15 feet from property line. 
e.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 15 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 30 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
b.  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding six square feet in area. 
c.  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in Article XIII. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 902) 
Sec. 903. - Mobile Home Park District (MHP). 
1.  District Intent: The intent of this district is to provide a sound and healthy residential area sufficient to meet the unique needs of inhabitants living in mobile homes, to protect mobile home parks from encroachment by incompatible uses, and to encourage the consolidation of mobile homes in parks, to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for mobile home parks. It is intended that all mobile home parks be desirable living areas providing adequate open space. 
2.  Uses of Right: The following uses shall be permitted in the Mobile Home Park District: 
a.  Mobile Home Parks; 
b.  Playgrounds and parks; 
c.  Laundromats; and 
d.  Accessory buildings and structures (see Section 1001). 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Public buildings and utilities; and 
b.  Uses which are in keeping with the intent of this district, and which will serve exclusively the residents of a particular Mobile Home Park district, such as, but not limited to, a convenience store, restaurant, and office space. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the Mobile Home Park District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum mobile home park area: ten acres. 
b.  Maximum density: seven mobile homes per acre. 
c.  Minimum lot area within park: 
1.  When both community or public water and community or public sewerage systems serve each lot: 5,000 square feet. 
2.  When a lot is served by community or public water and individual sewage disposal: 15,000 square feet (The county health department may require this minimum to be increased depending on the soil type, its ability to drain and water table characteristics.) 
d.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback within each lot in a park: ten feet from each lot line, for a minimum distance between two mobile homes to be no less than 20 feet. 
f.  Minimum setback from interior driveways: 15 feet. 
g.  Minimum setback from exterior street: 30 feet. 
h.  Minimum setback from park perimeter property lines: 20 feet. 
i.  Minimum open space requirement: five percent of the net acreage (net acreage being the total acreage less the area of streets, drives, and other infrastructure). 
j.  Minimum width of interior drives with unobstructed public access: 20 feet. 
k.  Mobile home parks shall have visual buffers such as shrubbery and/or opaque fencing at least six feet in height between the park and adjacent nonmobile home uses. Buffer strips shall meet the requirements of Section 1006. 
l.  Each mobile home park shall be graded and drained so that rainwater will not stand in pools or puddles. 
m.  All mobile home spaces shall abut on an interior drive of gravel or similar all-weather surface; parking spaces of gravel or similar all-weather surface sufficient to accommodate at least two automobiles shall be located on each mobile home space. 
n.  Mobile Home Placement: Mobile home supports or pillars shall be provided not more than ten feet on center or less beginning from the front of the mobile home stand. Supports or pillars shall be placed upon concrete pads having minimum dimensions of 16" x 16" x 4." 
o.  All mobile homes shall be anchored prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way. The anchoring system shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per hour. 
p.  All mobile homes shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be placed and supported so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No mobile home shall permanently rest on wheels used to support the unit. 
q.  All mobile home parks shall be required to provide one dumpster space for every 25 mobile home lots or every portion thereof. Each dumpster space shall be enclosed on three sides by a chain-link, solid brick, concrete block, or uniformly painted board fence, and screened from sight from the adjoining residences and adjacent streets. These spaces should be so designed and developed as to provide easy access to the county maintenance vehicles. The number of dumpsters leased from the county by the mobile home park owner shall be determined by need. 
r.  All manufactured (mobile) homes will be in compliance with Article X Section 1023 and Article X Section 1024. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area mounted flat against the wall of a building in which there is conducted a permitted home occupation. 
b.  Signs, illuminated or non-illuminated; not to exceed a combined total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park; and that where a mobile home park abuts a state primary highway, only one business identification sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed a total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 903) 
Sec. 904. - Multi-family Residential District (MF). 
1.  District Intent: This residential district is created to provide for medium and high population density. The principal use of land may range from single-family to apartment uses. Persons residing in this district are entitled to protection from other types of uses which are detrimental to the residential characteristics of the district. The regulations which apply to this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy living environment for its residents. 
2.  Uses of Right: Property and buildings in the Multi-Family District shall be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Multi-family dwellings and single-family attached dwelling units; 
b.  Single-family detached dwelling units; including manufactured homes; 
c.  Rooming or boarding house; 
d.  Churches, synagogues, other places of worship and cemeteries; 
e.  Parks or playgrounds; 
f.  Accessory buildings and structures (See Section 1001); 
g.  General purpose farm or garden, but not the keeping of poultry or animals; 
h.  Single-family Residential subdivisions will not be allowed. 
i.  Home occupations provided that the conditions set forth in Section 1014 are met. Exception: Home occupations will not be allowed in subdivisions or parcels where land covenants will not permit such a use as established by owner/developer. 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Public buildings and utilities; 
b.  Public and private schools; 
c.  Country clubs, golf courses; 
d.  Libraries, museums, nonprofit institutions; 
e.  Day care centers or kindergartens; 
f.  Lodge halls; 
g.  Medical facilities and offices with adequate off-street parking; 
h.  Assisted living homes; 
i.  Adult day care centers; 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the Multi-Family District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum Lot Area: 
b.  With both public/community water and public/community sewerage system: 10,000 square feet for each single-family residence or each multi-family dwelling unit. An additional 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit more than one in multi-family dwellings, apartments, and boarding houses shall be required. 
c.  With either public water or public/community sewerage system: 21,780 square feet for each single-family residence. An additional 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit more than one in multi-family dwellings, apartments and boarding houses shall be required—one half acre. 
d.  With private well and individual sewage disposal system: 43,560 square feet for each single-family residence. An additional 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit more than one in multi-family dwellings, apartments and boarding houses shall be required—1 acre. 
e.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 
150 feet—1 acre tract or parcel with well and septic system. 
125 feet—one half acre tract or parcel with municipal/community water and individual septic system. 
100 feet—municipal water and sewer. 
f.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 30 feet in urban area & 40 feet in rural area. 
g.  Minimum side yard setback: 
25 feet from street. 
15 feet from property line. 
h.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 40 feet. 
i.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 40 percent. 
j.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
k.  No more than eight continuous dwelling units shall be built in a row without a break between building groups of at least 20 feet. 
l.  No manufactured homes shall be placed within the city limits of Blackshear and Patterson; however, subdivisions within the city limits of Blackshear operating as manufactured home parks or mobile home parks prior to Feb. 1, 2005 may continue to operate under the other regulations set forth herein, and new permits for manufactured homes may be issued to those persons placing them within said existing parks and subdivisions. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
b.  For uses other than dwellings and for subdivision identification, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding 12 square feet in area. 
c.  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in Article XIII. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 904) 
Sec. 905. - Planned Unit Development District (PUD). 
1.  District Intent: This district is reserved for establishment of shopping centers, planned residential areas, industrial developments, and similar types of large-scale compatible use developments. The regulations are designed to permit the greatest latitude possible with respect to internal site County considerations, and location of these developments within the county in the interest of long-range development. This district encourages innovations in residential and nonresidential development so that growing demands for housing and commercial areas may be met by a greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space as well as other natural amenities. 
2.  Specific Requirements: In order to qualify for a Planned Unit Development classification, a proposed Planned Unit Development must first meet the following specific requirements: 
a.  The site utilized for Planned Unit Developments must contain an area of not less than four acres. 
b.  The site must have a minimum width between any two opposite boundary lines of 300 feet and must adjoin or have direct access to at least one improved public street. 
c.  The application for amendment to the Development Code shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the Planned Unit Development. 
d.  A suitable plot plan shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the community development director, planning commission and the board of commissioners and/or city council. 
e.  A written report shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the community development director, planning commission and the board of commissioners and/or city council. 
3.  Application for Amendment: 
a.  Any request pertaining to establishing a PUD District shall be considered an amendment to the Development Code and shall be processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article VI. 
b.  All information required in Section 905.4 shall be submitted to the code inspector, who will then forward the PUD plan to the planning commission, which will then subsequently forward the plan to the board of commissioners and/or city council, with the recommendations of the county commission. 
c.  If approved by the board of commissioners and any affected municipality, all information pertaining to the proposal shall be adopted as an amendment to the Development Code, to be the standards of development for that particular Planned Unit Development District. 
d.  Before approval of a Planned Unit Development District, the affected local government may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the county attorney and city attorney of any affected municipality guaranteeing completion of the development according to the criteria listed herein. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount set by the affected local government. 
4.  Sketch Plan for Planned Unit Development: Prior to the filing of plot plan for Planned Unit Development, a sketch plan may be submitted to the community development director for review and recommendation. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch. When submitted, the sketch plan shall include the following information: 
a.  General information items: 
1.  Name of the proposed development and developers; 
2.  A north arrow; 
3.  The boundary lines of the proposed development; 
4.  The location, name and right-of-way width of any existing streets within or adjacent to the proposed development. 
b.  Proposed building sites and sizes, and the proposed layout of roads, parking areas and other features in relation to existing conditions. 
c.  Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
d.  Proposed means of water and sewage disposal. 
5.  Plot Plan for Planned Unit Development: 
The plot plan drawn to scale (1" equals 100' or 1" equals 50') by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered architect shall show the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration. The plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  General information items: 
1.  Name of the development and developers; 
2.  A north arrow; 
3.  Date of field survey; 
4.  Tract boundary lines, dimensions bearings and angles; and 
5.  Reference points to at least two permanent monuments. 
b.  Proposed building sites and sizes. 
c.  Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures. 
d.  All property dimensions. 
e.  Platting and street systems: 
1.  Proposed reservations or dedications for streets; 
2.  Means of ingress and egress; 
3.  Access and circulation arrangements; and 
4.  Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
f.  Means of protecting or screening abutting properties, including proposed landscaping. 
g.  Location of proposed reservations, easements, or dedications. 
h.  If requested, two foot vertical contour intervals. 
6.  Written Report for Planned Unit Development: A written report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development, and shall include, where applicable: 
a.  A general description of the proposal. 
b.  A legal description of the site. 
c.  Proposed standards for development including: 
1.  Restrictions on the use of property; 
2.  Density, yard and height requirements; and 
3.  Restrictive covenants. 
d.  Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
e.  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of the Development Code, if any, are being requested. 
f.  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and storm drainage facilities. 
g.  Descriptions of percentage of land within the development to be provided for various uses: 
1.  Residential; 
2.  Commercial; 
3.  Industrial; 
4.  Open space; 
5.  Utilities; 
6.  Parking and storage; and 
7.  Others. 
7.  Uses of right: Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the planning commission and board of commissioners/city council as being compatible with surrounding districts and the intent of the proposed PUD District may be permitted. Thereafter, the uses of right in the district shall be restricted to those proposed, approved, and adopted according to procedures set forth herein. 
8.  General Design Criteria and Development Standards: 
a.  Overall site design should be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosures of principal and accessory uses, sizes and street patterns, and use relationships. 
b.  Variety in building types, heights, placement on lots and size of open spaces are encouraged if they are conducive to a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing living environment. 
c.  The average density for residential dwelling units in a PUD District should not exceed those set forth in the MF District, although it may be clustered within the PUD District. 
d.  A 50 foot buffer strip with plant cover, trees and/or an attractive fence should be provided by the PUD District, unless the adjoining use is compatible. For instance, when one family and multi-family dwellings within a PUD District are on property adjoining a MF District, then no buffer shall be required. 
e.  Within a PUD District, the design should include buffers suitable for screening residential areas from commercial or industrial uses when dangers of incompatibility exist. 
f.  The sign and parking regulations of this Code should be accepted as minimum standards and therefore creative improvements are encouraged. Only those signs incorporated in plans for PUDs approved by the planning commission are permitted in Planned Unit Development Districts. 
g.  Shopping centers and other types of Planned Unit Developments shall not have more than two access points to any one public street, unless unusual circumstances dictate the need for additional access points. 
h.  All access points from a PUD District should be located at least 100 feet from the intersection of any street. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 905) 
Sec. 906. - Neighborhood Commercial District (NC). 
1.  District Intent: This district is created to provide nearby residential areas with convenient shopping and service facilities. Uses will include those businesses and services which are desired by neighborhood residents on a day-to-day basis. Regulations are designed to encourage a stable, healthy and compatible environment, reduce traveling and parking inconveniences, avoid strip commercial development, and prevent industrial and other encroachment capable of destroying the neighborhood commercial character of the district. 
2.  Uses of Right: Property and buildings in a Neighborhood Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises and without outdoor display of goods, such as, but not limited to, groceries, drugs, clothing, notions or hardware. 
b.  Personal service establishment which performs services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, repair shops (radio, television, shoes, upholstery, etc.), beauty parlors or barbershops, self-service laundries, dry cleaners. 
c.  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real estate offices. 
d.  Professional services including the following: medical clinics (out-patient only), and offices of doctors, dentists and similar or allied professions. 
e.  Post office and similar governmental office buildings serving persons living in the adjacent residential area. 
f.  Churches, synagogues, other places of worship. 
g.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls. 
h.  Residential uses lawfully existing within the district at the time of adoption of this Code. 
i.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses (See Section 1001). 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Automobile fuel station with no more than six pumps, provided that all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from right-of-way line of all abutting streets, and parking or service areas are entirely separated from adjoining residential properties by an opaque planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
b.  Restaurants and other eating establishments provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining residential properties; and parking service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by an opaque planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
c.  Public utility installations and buildings including communication towers, water towers, electric transformer stations, water and sewage pumping stations provided that no storage is permitted at the site; the area is fenced in by a wall or fence at least six feet in height; a landscaped strip not less than ten feet in width is planted and maintained. 
4.  District Regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
21,780 square feet, with municipal water or sewer—½ acre. 
43,560 square feet with well and individual septic system—1 acre. 
b.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 
100 feet with municipal water and sewer. 
150 feet with well and septic or municipal/community water and individual septic system. 
c.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 30 feet city and 40 feet in rural area. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: 
20 feet from street. 
15 feet from property line. 
15 feet rear setback. 
e.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent. 
f.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  The number of signs shall be limited to three for each street on which the establishment fronts. The maximum size of a sign for any business establishment shall be 48 square ft. 
b.  Wall signs must comply with the requirements of Section XIII. 
c.  Roof signs are not allowed. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 906) 
Sec. 907. - General Commercial District (C). 
1.  District Intent: The intent of this district is to encourage an economically healthy environment for a wide variety of businesses and services which benefit from close proximity to each other. The regulations shall encourage intense land development, and discourage uses requiring large areas of land in proportion to the number of pedestrians. The regulations are concerned with excluding all uses involving heavy trucking which are not related to the predominant retail activity, and particularly in excluding manufacturing and warehousing. 
2.  Uses of Right: 
a.  Generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises and without outdoor display of goods, such as, but not limited to, groceries, drugs, clothing, notions or hardware. 
b.  Personal service establishment which performs services on the premises such as, but not limited to, repair shops (radio, television, shoes, upholstery, etc.), beauty parlors or barbershops, self-service laundries, dry cleaners. 
c.  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited to, banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real estate offices. 
d.  Professional services including the following: medical clinics (outpatient only), and offices of doctors, dentists and similar or allied professions. 
e.  Post office and similar governmental office buildings serving persons living in the adjacent residential area. 
f.  Churches, synagogues, other places of worship. 
g.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls. 
h.  Residential uses lawfully existing within the district at the time of adoption of this Code. 
i.  All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as follows: 
1.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building. 
2.  Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature, including, but not limited to, of an electrician, decorator, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer, or television, radio or home appliance repair; and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct. 
j.  Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except "drive-in" types. 
k.  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
l.  Indoor commercial recreation centers. 
m.  Hotel or motel. 
n.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or second-hand automobiles, manufactured or modular homes, boats and other such items provided the lot is graded, surfaced and drained so as to dispose of all surface water; and provided that ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any streets. 
b.  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building, or provided the lot is of sufficient size and setbacks to disallow nuisances to adjacent properties. 
c.  Drive-in Restaurants provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining districts (if any); and parking service areas are separated from adjoining districts (if any) by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
d.  Drive-in Theaters, provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining districts (if any) and that all adjoining properties are separated by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
e.  Automobile service station, provided that all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from right-of-way line of all abutting streets, and parking or service areas are entirely separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
f.  Public utility installations and buildings including communication towers, water towers, electric transformer stations, water and sewage pumping stations provided that no storage is permitted at the site; the area is fenced in by a wall or fence at least six feet in height; a landscaped strip not less than ten feet in width is planted and maintained. 
4.  District Regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the C, General Commercial District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
21,780 square feet with municipal water or sewer—one half acre. 
43,560 square feet with well and septic tank or municipal water and sewer. 
Or individual septic system—1 acre. 
b.  Minimum lot width at building line: 
100 feet with municipal water and sewer. 
150 feet with well and septic or municipal/community water or individual septic system. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback from curbed street: 15 feet if on street parking is provided. 
d.  Minimum front yard setback from noncurbed street: 30 feet in the city and 40 feet in the rural area. 
e.  Minimum side yard setback: 
10 feet from property line. 
15 feet from street. 
20 feet from street if corner lot. 
20 feet from residential property. 
f.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: ten feet. 
g.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent. 
h.  Maximum building height: 
35 feet if adjacent to residential property. 
60 feet otherwise. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  All Signs permitted in all other Zoning Districts are permitted in the C district. 
b.  On any occupied land development lot in a commercial district, not more than four signs of any type having a total area of not more than 750 square feet shall be permitted. 
c.  Commercial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in commercial districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
d.  Roof signs or wall signs shall, in no case, exceed the requirements of Section 1303. 
e.  Additional sign structures, as defined above, each of which does not exceed 600 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted provided they are spaced not closer than 300 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on a commercially zoned lot. 
f.  Signs in the commercial district may be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 907) 
Sec. 908. - Light Industrial District (LI). 
1.  District Intent: This district is established to provide land for various types of industrial, manufacturing or warehousing operations which are compatible to adjoining districts. Such uses generally require storage of materials or goods either before or after the manufacturing process, but are of low noise or nuisance level. Land for this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the community as well as rail and air if required, and designated so as to not disrupt normal traffic flow. The development of Light Industrial Parks as Planned Unit Developments is encouraged. 
2.  Uses of Right: Property and buildings in an LI, Light Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, and shall be conducted in such a manner that noxious odors, fumes, or dust and particles will not be emitted beyond the property lines of the lots on which the uses are located. Uses shall also be conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
a.  Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and similar materials; 
b.  Food and kindred processing plants; 
c.  Contractors' equipment storage yard or plant, and with equipment commonly used by contractors; 
d.  Freight, truck yard or terminal; 
e.  Warehouse and wholesale establishments; 
f.  Research or experimental stations and laboratories; 
g.  Repair garages; 
h.  Office buildings for business, professional or other general purposes; 
i.  Horticultural nursery; and 
j.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (See section 1001) 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Any industrial use in keeping with the intent of this district, and which involves manufacturing, processing, assembly or storage operations, provided that the use does not involve any junk or salvage operations; that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials; and that any noises, vibrations, smoke, gases, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards, or other obnoxious or unsafe conditions related to the operation do not extend beyond the property of the industry. 
b.  Retail business, provided such business is incidental to a permitted use and located on the premises of such permitted use. 
c.  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
d.  Radio and/or television station with transmission towers. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses of right in the LI, Light Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet with well and septic tank or municipal water and sewer or individual septic system—1 acre. 
b.  Minimum lot width at building line: 150 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 30 feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback. 
30 feet from street. 
25 feet from property line. 
e.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 25 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 50 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  All Signs permitted in all other districts are permitted in the light industrial districts. 
b.  On any occupied land development lot in the general industrial district, not more than four signs of any type having a total area of not more than 750 square feet shall be permitted. 
c.  Industrial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in industrial districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
d.  Roof signs or wall signs shall, in no case, exceed the requirements of Section 1303. 
e.  Additional sign structures, as defined above, each of which does not exceed 600 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted provided they are spaced not closer than 300 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on a industrially zoned lot. 
f.  Signs in the light industrial district may be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 908) 
Sec. 909. - General Industrial District (I). 
1.  District Intent: This district is created to provide land for industrial, manufacturing, and warehousing operations which require buildings and open areas for fabricating, processing, extracting, or repairing equipment, raw materials, manufactured products, or wastes. The traffic networks of the county and region are to be considered in order to discourage disruption and congestion of traffic. The intensity of uses of right in this district makes it desirable that they be located downwind, as determined by the prevailing wind direction, and separated from residential and commercial uses. 
2.  Uses of Right: Property and buildings in an industrial district shall be used for the following purposes, and shall be in conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources: 
a.  Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and similar materials; 
b.  Food and kindred processing plants; 
c.  Contractors' equipment storage yard or plant, and with equipment commonly used by contractors; 
d.  Freight, truck yard or terminal; 
e.  Warehouse and wholesale establishments; 
f.  Research or experimental stations and laboratories; 
g.  Repair garages; 
h.  Office buildings for business, professional or other general purposes; 
i.  Horticultural nursery; 
j.  Any industrial uses which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations, or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products or equipment; 
k.  Accessory Buildings, structures and uses and customarily incidental to the above uses (See Section 1001). 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Retail business provided such business is incidental to a permitted use and located on the premises of such permitted use. 
b.  Any industrial use that does not produce injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions as a result of its operations and that such use is located at least 50 feet from any adjoining property lines, and provided that such use be in conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
c.  Setbacks will be 50 ft. from all property lines. No burning will be allowed on the premises: and that any noise, vibrations, smoke, gases, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards, or other unsafe conditions will not extend beyond the property lines of the operation. 
d.  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
e.  Radio and/or television station with towers. 
f.  Open yard use for the sale, dismantling and/ or storage of salvage or junk materials and equipment provided that such use is separated from adjoining properties by a planting screen, fence or wall at least eight feet in height. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses in the general industrial district shall conform to the following regulations: 
a.  Minimum lot area: one acre, plus an additional 10,000 square feet for each ten feet of building height over 45 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: 
50 feet from street. 
40 feet from property line. 
e.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 40 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 85 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  All Signs permitted in all other districts are permitted in the general industrial districts. 
b.  On any occupied land development lot in the general industrial district, not more than four signs of any type having a total area of not more than 750 square feet shall be permitted. 
c.  Industrial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in industrial districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
d.  Roof signs or wall signs shall, in no case, exceed the requirements of Section 1303. 
e.  Additional sign structures, as defined above, each of which does not exceed 600 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted provided they are spaced not closer than 300 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on a industrially zoned lot. 
f.  Signs in the general industrial district may be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 909) 
Sec. 910. - Parks/Recreation/Conservation District (PRC). 
1.  District Intent: This district is established to preserve and control development within certain land, swamp and water areas of this county. These areas serve as wildlife refuges, possess great natural beauty, are of historical or ecological significance, are utilized for outdoor recreational purposes, or provide needed open space for the health and general welfare of the county's inhabitants. The regulations are designed to discourage encroachment of uses capable of destroying the undeveloped character of the district. 
2.  Uses of Right: The following uses shall be permitted in the PRC, Parks/Recreation/Conservation District. 
a.  Parks, including playgrounds; 
b.  Private dock or boathouse; 
c.  Boat marina; 
d.  Bait house; 
e.  Publicly-owned open space or recreational facilities; 
f.  Private preservation areas; 
g.  Wildlife refuges, including dwelling units of caretakers; and 
h.  Museum or exhibit area on or near land of historic, aesthetic, or educational significance. 
i.  Accessory Buildings, structures and uses and customarily incidental to the above uses (See Section 1001). 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Churches and/or cemeteries. 
b.  Agriculture or silviculture production, with dwelling units for the owner and/or operator. 
c.  Dredging or timber cutting, which must comply with state and federal regulations. Furthermore, plans for the alteration of lands in the PRC District must be submitted and approved by the county commission and the board of commissioners. 
d.  Public utility lines, fire or water tower, utility sub-stations. 
4.  District regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses in the PRC District shall conform to the following regulations: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
10,000 square feet for parks and recreation purposes. 
One half acre for a conservation use (such as a wetland area or scenic location). 
b.  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback from street/property line: 40 feet. 
e.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 50 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 20 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  One non-illuminated use identification sign, not exceeding 20 square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted. 
b.  Other directional or historical identification signs approved by the county commission and county [city] commission. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 910) 
Sec. 911. - Public/institutional District (PI). 
1.  District Intent: To provide land specifically for local, state, or federal government uses, and institutional land uses. 
2.  Uses of Right: 
a.  Colleges; 
b.  Churches, synagogues, and other places of worship, and cemeteries; 
c.  Hospitals, nursing homes; 
d.  Health services, Nursing Homes; 
e.  City halls or government complexes; 
f.  State or federal government buildings; 
g.  Police, emergency medical, and fire stations; 
h.  Libraries; 
i.  Prisons; 
j.  Post offices; 
k.  Schools; 
l.  Other publicly-owned facilities; and 
m.  Accessory uses for above (See Section 1003). 
n.  Adult day care centers and assisted living homes. 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
a.  Commercial uses as defined as uses of right in the C, Commercial District and the NC, Neighborhood Commercial District. 
b.  Residential units—for security or proximity to a specific use of right. 
4.  District Regulations: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses in the Public/Institutional District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 
One half acre, with public water or sewer. 
1 acre with well and septic tank. 
Rear Minimum set back will be same as section "902." 
b.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 50 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 
30 feet in the city. 
40 feet in rural area. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: 
20 feet from street. 
15 feet from property line. 
20 feet from residential property line. 
e.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent. 
f.  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  All Signs permitted in all other districts are permitted in the PI district. 
b.  On any occupied land development lot in a PI district, not more than four signs of any type having a total area of not more than 500 square feet shall be permitted. 
c.  Public/Institutional or Commercial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in PI districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
d.  Wall signs shall, in no case, exceed the requirements of Section 1303. 
e.  Additional sign structures, as defined above, each of which does not exceed 500 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted provided they are spaced not closer than 300 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on a PI zoned lot. 
f.  Signs in the PI District may be illuminated. 
g.  Roof signs shall not be allowed in the PI District. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 911) 
Sec. 912. - Transportation/Communication/Utilities (TCU). 
1.  District Intent: To specifically designate land for the use of public and private utilities, transportation networks and systems, and public/private communication systems and facilities. 
2.  Uses of Right: 
a.  Power generation plants; 
b.  Railroad facilities; 
c.  Radio towers, and communication towers; 
d.  Public transit stations; 
e.  Airports; 
f.  Telephone switching stations; 
g.  Accessory buildings and structures (see Section 1001); and 
h.  Other publicly-owned facilities. 
3.  Conditional Uses: 
a.  Office or other support facilities, whether public or private, commercial or noncommercial, for a specific use of right. 
4.  District Regulations: Land uses in the TCU District shall be developed under the same regulations as a Planned Unit Development, with the following requirements serving as a guide to the minimum desired: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet, with an additional 2,000 square feet required for each five foot increments in structure height over 35 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 50 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 25 feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: 
20 feet from street. 
15 feet from property line. 
20 feet from residential property line. 
e.  Minimum rear yard setback: 
10 feet from nonresidential property line. 
15 feet from residential property line. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
5.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  All Signs permitted in all other districts are permitted in the TCU District. 
b.  On any occupied lot in a TCU District, not more than four signs of any type, of a total area of not more than 500 square feet shall be permitted. 
c.  Public/Private uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in TCU Districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area one identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
d.  Roof and wall signs shall not exceed the requirements of Section 1303. 
e.  Additional sign structures, as defined above, each of which does not exceed 500 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted, provided they are spaced not closer than 300 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of the street and further provided that they are on a TCU zoned lot. 
f.  Signs in the TCU District may be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 912) 
Sec. 913. - Vacant/Undeveloped District (V). 
1.  District Intent: This district is for land that has never been developed for a specific use and land that was developed for a particular use but which has been abandoned. 
2.  Uses of Right: 
a.  Woodlands not part of commercial timber production; 
b.  Pasture land not uses for agriculture cropping or livestock; 
c.  Undeveloped portions of residential subdivisions; 
d.  Undeveloped portions of commercial or industrial parks; and 
e.  Locations of structures that have been vacant for some time and have been allowed to become deteriorated or dilapidated. 
3.  Conditional Uses: Due to the nature of this District, a conditional use is not applicable to a Vacant/Undeveloped designation. 
4.  District Regulations: The only regulation of this district is that the designation of a lot or property as Vacant/Undeveloped, when such a designation has been given a property that was previously zoned under a different district, is immediately reverted to the previous designation given the site on the Official Zoning Map. If the property has historically been vacant, the owner must apply and follow the procedure for a rezoning by the county commission. 
5.  Sign regulations: No new signs may be placed on Vacant/Undeveloped properties without first having the property rezoned to a district which allows the desired signage. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 913) 
Sec. 914. - Flood Hazard District (FH). 
1.  District Intent: This district is created to ensure continuance of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which accommodate floodwaters. These regulations are designed to minimize costly flood control, rescue and relief projects undertaken at the expense of the general public, and minimize damage to public facilities and utilities which may be located in floodplains. This district will help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. Furthermore, potential property buyers shall be notified that property within this district is subject to flood hazard. The mapped flood hazard areas within Pierce County are hereby designated to be used as an overlay land development district to the various zoning districts as delineated by the Official Zoning Map. Thus, the land may be utilized only under the conditions and regulations of both zones. The boundaries of Flood Hazard Districts shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map. Within these FH districts, all uses not allowed as Uses of right or Conditional Uses shall be prohibited. 
This district's regulations are intended to be interim until such time that the Federal Insurance Administrator provides the following information pertaining to flood hazard in the unincorporated areas of the county as required by the National Flood Insurance Program: 
a.  Notice of final base flood elevations; 
b.  Identification of high hazard areas; and 
c.  Identification of regulatory floodways within the county. 
2.  Uses of Right: Due to the nature of the Flood Hazard District, the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the county property owners restricts uses in the Flood Hazard overlay district to those uses termed Conditional. 
3.  Conditional Uses: The following open space uses shall be permitted, after proper administrative review, within the Flood Hazard District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other regulations and provided they do not demand structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment. In addition, no use shall adversely affect the efficiency or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways or any tributary, drainage ditch, or other drainage facility or system. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 408, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
a.  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and crop harvesting. 
b.  Industrial/Commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips. 
c.  Private and public recreational uses, including golf courses, tennis courts, playing fields, driving or archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat landings, ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife preserves, shooting ranges, hunting and fishing areas, biking and horseback riding trails. 
d.  Accessory Residential uses, such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
e.  The following list of Conditional Uses may be allowed, provided that no structure, fill (including fill for roads and levees, deposit, storage of materials or equipment), or other activities associated with the use impairs the efficiency or the capacity of the floodway, or unduly increases flood heights. 
1.  Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement enterprises; 
2.  Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands and signs; 
3.  Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials; 
4.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves; 
5.  Railroads, utility lines, streets, bridges and pipelines; 
6.  Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials; 
7.  Kennels and stables; and 
8.  Other uses similar in nature to other Conditional Uses. 
f.  Residences may be permitted provided: 
1.  Residences are located in a flood fringe area (This will require technical assistance); 
2.  Residences shall be constructed on fill or other acceptable elevating practice with the first floor or basement floor above the regulatory flood elevation (This will require technical assistance); and 
3.  All district regulations of the underlying zoning district are met. 
g.  Fill or material deposits provided: 
1.  Any fill or materials proposed to be deposited in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the amount must not be greater than is necessary to achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials; and 
2.  Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetation cover or bulk-heading. 
h.  Accessory structures to Conditional Uses provided: 
1.  Structures shall not be designed for human habitation; 
2.  Structures shall have a low flood damage potential; 
3.  Structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters; 
4.  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and 
5.  Structures shall be firmly anchored. 
4[6].  District Regulations: The applicant shall be required to provide information necessary for determining the regulatory flood protection elevation, whether the proposed use is located in the floodway or flood fringe, and other factors necessary to render a decision on the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use. This shall include: 
a.  Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel and/or flood hazard zone. 
b.  A typical cross-section showing the channel of the water course, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high water information or similar information pertinent to a flood hazard situation. 
c.  Plans (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and spatial arrangement of proposed and existing structures; locations and elevations of streets, utilities; land uses and vegetation surrounding areas, and soil types. 
d.  Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel, if applicable. 
e.  Specifications for building construction, materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, water supply and sanitary facilities. 
5[7].  Sign Regulations: Any signs proposed within the Flood Hazard overlay district must meet the signage requirements for the district upon which the FH designation is overlaid. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 914) 
ARTICLE X. - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1001. - Accessory uses and structures. 
In addition to the principal uses which are designated herein as being permitted within several zoning districts established by the Code, it is intended that certain uses customarily incidental or accessory to such principal uses shall also be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1001) 
Sec. 1002. - Accessory structures and uses for non-commercial and non-industrial properties. 
For the purposes of this Code, therefore, each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use, and, as such, may be situated on the same lot with the principal use or uses to which it serves as an accessory. 
1.  Private garage for the occupant's automobiles or vehicles. Must be noncommercial usage of garage; 
2.  Parking area or open storage space for motor vehicles belonging to the occupant, and provided that this regulation shall not be misconstrued to mean commercial uses are allowed; 
3.  Shed or tool for the storage of equipment; 
4.  Children's playhouse or play equipment; 
5.  Private kennel, pens or cages for occupant's pets provided it does not create a nuisance to neighbors; 
6.  Private swimming pool and bath house or cabana; 
7.  Structures designed and used for the purposes of shelter in the event of catastrophes; 
8.  Non-commercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden, greenhouse or slat house; 
9.  Private boat dock, boat houses; 
10.  Church Buildings, including sanctuary: 
a.  Religious education buildings; 
b.  Parsonage, pastorium, or parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed above; and 
c.  Off-street parking area for the use without charge to members and visitors to the church. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1002) 
Sec. 1003. - Accessory structures and uses for commercial and industrial uses. 
1.  Off-street parking or storage area for customer-, client- or employee-owned vehicles; 
2.  Completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock or merchandise; 
3.  Light manufacturing and/or repair facility incidental to the principal use, provided that dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare produced as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from any boundary line of the lot on which said principal and accessory uses are located, and provided such operation is not otherwise specifically prohibited in the district in which the principal use is located; 
4.  Sheltered roofs, awnings or canopies incidental to retail and commercial use, where such use is permitted, provided that no part shall, in any case, be located any closer than ten feet to any property line. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1003) 
Sec. 1004. - Setback and other requirements for accessory uses and structures. 
In any district, all accessory uses and structures, shall observe the following minimum requirements for setbacks, yards, and other district conditions set forth for the district in which they are located: 
a.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: ten feet. 
b.  Minimum side yard setback from street/property line: ten feet property; 15 feet street. 
Exception: Any new constructed or pre-fab buildings in the Agriculture/Forestry District more than 2,000 square feet in floor size shall meet the setback requirements in Section 901 tab (4) sections (c), (d), and (e) of the development code. If intended use of such building is used for raising of livestock, kennels or any non-domesticated animals, then it must comply with Section 901 Agriculture/Forestry (AF). 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1004) 
Sec. 1005. - Address numbering system. 
All subdivision plats shall be provided with an address numbering system suitable for use by the U.S. Postal Service and which is compatible with any other system in the surrounding area. This system shall be reviewed and approved by the postmaster of the appropriate post office and placed on a reproducible mylar copy of the final plat before final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1005) 
Sec. 1006. - Buffer strips. 
Any institutional, commercial, or industrial uses, off-street loading areas, or off-street parking areas for five or more automobiles shall be separated from adjoining residential property by a continuous planted buffer strip or a solid brick, concrete block, or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block, or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1006) 
Sec. 1007. - Building lines. 
Building lines shall be provided on all lots and shall conform to the Zoning District Regulations pertaining to the classification in which the lots to be subdivided are located. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1007) 
Sec. 1008. - Building permits. 
No building permits shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot created following the enactment of this Code which does not comply with the requirements established herein and unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed has been accepted, opened as, or shall have otherwise received the status of a public street or an officially approved private recorded easement. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1008) 
Sec. 1009. - Debris and waste. 
No cut trees, timber, debris, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, expiration of the performance bond or acceptance of public improvements, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1009) 
Sec. 1010. - Dedication of local recreation sites and open space. 
Where a proposed park, playground, open space, or other local or neighborhood recreation or school site is shown on the Comprehensive Plan, or where the planning commission considers that a local recreation or school site is necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations, the planning commission shall require the dedication of all or a portion of such site in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The land to be dedicated (fee simple) shall be of suitable size, dimensions, topography, access, and general character for the proposed use; and 
2.  The amount of land so required for this purpose shall not be more than five percent of the total gross area of the subdivision, including the dedicated right-of-way. 
3.  Where it is determined that a greater amount of land is required for parks and open spaces to meet the Comprehensive Plan requirements for that area of the County, or a school site is required, the planning commission after so appraising the appropriate public agency, shall so indicate the open space or school site requirements to the subdivider on the approved preliminary plan. 
4.  The subdivider, at the time of the filing of the final plat with the planning commission, must offer to sell at a fair market price to the county or other appropriate public agency, within one year immediately following the recording of the final plat, any land so designated for school sites or any land designated for park or open space in excess of the five percent of land area required to be dedicated, in accordance with Section 1010.3. 
5.  If any such proposed public areas or school sites have not been purchased by the appropriate public agency within one year after the recording of the final plat, such areas may be subdivided into lots and blocks in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
6.  Where the area required for dedication for recreation or open space use would result in a site deemed by the planning commission to be too small to be useable, or if the Comprehensive Plan calls for a public recreation site to be located in the vicinity of the subdivision, as determined by the planning commission, in lieu of dedication of such land, this developer may pay a fee. All money paid to the County in this manner shall be kept in a special reserve fund and shall be used only for the acquisition of land and/or development of facilities for recreation and open space purposes. The following stipulations shall apply: 
a.  The amount of the fee shall be substantially equal to the value, prior to the development, of the land that would be set aside if the regular standards were applied. 
b.  The fee shall be paid to Pierce County, Georgia, prior to the approval of the final plat. 
7.  In lieu of requiring the dedication of a recreation site or permanent open space, or permitting a fee to be paid for this purpose, the planning commission may permit a private site to be used under the following conditions: 
a.  If in the judgment of the planning commission, the purposes of this Code regarding recreation and open space land will be accomplished; and 
b.  If the private site is permanently devoted to recreation use of open space and adequately secured for such use by proper deed covenants or other private restrictions. 
8.  The planning commission may exempt subdivisions where the minimum lot size is two acres or more from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1010) 
Sec. 1011. - Double loaded/double frontage lots. 
Lots having frontage on more than one street, but not located on a corner, are not allowed after the adoption of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1011) 
Sec. 1012. - Dumpsters. 
All subdivisions, and revisions or extensions of existing subdivisions, shall be required to provide for every 25 lots, a minimum of one six-yard garbage dumpster and designated, if a regular curbside collection system is unavailable. Each dumpster shall be enclosed by solid fencing screening the dumpsters from sight from the adjacent lots and streets. The dumpster spaces shall be so designed and developed as to provide easy access to county, or similar, maintenance vehicles from a paved surface, and shall not be located in a normal road right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1012) 
Sec. 1013. - Easements. 
The following easements shall be required within subdivisions: 
1.  A ten foot utility easement shall be provided on both sides of street rights-of-way within a subdivision. This easement area shall only be used for underground electric, telephone and television cable lines where there is not sufficient area within the right-of-way. The easement area shall be kept free of fences, screens or other permanent structures. 
2.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose of drainage and maintenance, taking into account possible future development of higher land in the same drainage area. No fences, screens, or permanent structures shall be erected or placed on or within any drainage easement. Calculations and elevations shall be provided to the county road superintendent to substantiate the proposed drainage system. Runoff quantities shall be calculated based on the rational formula, Q=AIR, the Georgia DOT Drainage Manual or any other approved engineering procedure by a registered engineer. System design storm Frequency shall be: 
A.  25 years for subdivisions; 
B.  50 years for commercial and industrial development; and 
C.  100 years for areas greater than 200 acres. 
Minimum time of concentration shall be 20 minutes. 
3.  Where a drainage canal is such size that it requires mechanical means for cleaning, such as a dragline, there shall be 15 foot access easement of right-of-way on either side of such canal for access purposes. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1013) 
Sec. 1014. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation, if it is permitted in a zoning district must comply with the following requirements. It shall be allowed, provided that it: 
1.  Is conducted by no other person than members of the family residing on the premises; 
2.  Is conducted within the principal building; 
3.  Utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal building; 
4.  Produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior or change in the principal building from that of a dwelling; 
6[5].  Involves no sale or offering for sale of any article not produced or assembled by members of the family, or any service not entirely performed by members of the family, residing on the premises; 
6.  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition; and 
7.  Is not visibly evident from the outside of the dwelling except by one non-illuminated sign two square feet or smaller in size. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1014) 
Sec. 1015. - Junk/salvage yards. 
All junk/salvage yards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with an opaque fence or wall a minimum of eight feet in height, maintained in good condition as determined by the governing authority, and painted except for masonry construction, or with suitable plantings. No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance or endanger the public health. A junk/salvage yard permit with a fee of $200 is required, to be obtained from the code inspector and renewed annually. 
No burning will be allowed on the premises. Set back will be 50 ft. from all property line. 
No noises, vibrations, smoke, gases, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards or other obnoxious or unsafe conditions will extend beyond the property lines. See section 909. The property shall be zoned General Industrial (I). 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1015) 
Sec. 1016. - Lots. 
All lots which shall hereafter be established within a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards and the following general requirements shall apply to all lots hereafter established within a subdivision: 
1.  Orientation of Lot Lines. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street right-of-way lines, or radial to street right-of-way curves and cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
2.  Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be provided with sufficient width and depth to permit the establishment of appropriate building setback lines from both streets. 
3.  Double Loaded Lots. Double loaded lots shall only be permitted where it shall be found necessary to separate a development from major arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages to topography and orientation. 
4.  Minimum Lot Elevation. Elevations of lots within flood prone areas as defined officially by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Pierce County shall conform to the requirements established for development within the established boundaries. 
5.  Flag Lots. Flag lots shall be permitted under the following conditions: 
a.  New Minor Subdivisions—not to exceed 50 percent of the total created lots. 
b.  New Major Subdivisions—not to exceed 10 percent of the total created lots. 
c.  Where the flag lot makes it possible to better utilize irregularly-shaped properties or areas with resource limitations. 
d.  Lots containing one acre or less will have an access strip having a minimum frontage of 25 feet on an approved public right-of-way. Lots containing more than one acre will have a minimum frontage of 50 feet on an approved public or private right-of-way. See Section 515. 
e.  Minimum lot size, excluding the area of the access strip, of 12,000 square feet or the minimum lot size requirement for the Zoning District in which the property is located, whichever is greater. 
f.  No building shall be permitted in the access strip. 
g.  Lot width, front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the Pierce County Development Code to be met on that portion of the lot excluding the access strip. 
h.  Where flag lots are used to eliminate and not substantially increase the number of access points to collector or arterial streets. 
i.  Where flag lots would front on State-owned highways the proposed subdivision shall be approved by Georgia DOT for the increase in curb cuts prior to being submitted to the planning commission. 
j.  Where flag lots would front on county/city-owned streets the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed by the county/city road engineer to determine if there is any potential hazard created by an increase in the number of access points on county/city streets. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1016) 
Sec. 1017. - Lots of record. 
1.  No permit for the use of any lot which is smaller in total area than the minimum size permitted for the district within which it is located shall be issued unless said lot was legally and properly recorded prior to the passage of this Code. 
2.  Yards or lots recorded after the effective date of this Code shall comply with the requirements established by this Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1017) 
Sec. 1018. - Non-conforming uses and structures. 
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this Code may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this Code, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Unsafe structures: Nothing in this Code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. 
2.  Alterations: A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or reconstructed provided such work is not to an extent exceeding ten percent of the current (reasonable fair market value) value of the building or structure, unless the building or structure is changed to a conforming use. 
3.  Extension: A nonconforming use shall not be extended, but the extension of a lawful use in a nonconforming building or structure which existed prior to the enactment of this Code is permitted. 
4.  Changes: No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be changed to another nonconforming use. 
5.  Restoration: Nothing in this Code shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or acts of God, subsequent to the date of this Code, wherein the expense of such work does not exceed 60 percent of its current (reasonable fair market value) value of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. 
6.  Abandonment: A nonconforming use of a building or structure which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned: 
a.  When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; 
b.  When the equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises, and have not been replaced during the year, unless facts show the intention to resume the nonconforming use; 
c.  When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or 
d.  When it is being changed to another use requiring permit or Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1018) 
Sec. 1019. - Principal use or structure. 
There shall be one principal structure with one principal use permitted on one zoned lot. Applications for more than one principal structure and/or use permitted on one zoned lot shall meet the requirements of the Planned Unit Development District. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1019) 
Sec. 1020. - Timber cutting. 
Timber cutting within 50 feet from the outer edge of any river, stream, creek and spring is prohibited. Any such use is also subject to all State Erosion and Sedimentation Control regulations. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1020) 
Sec. 1021. - Utilities. 
All utilities shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Where feasible, subdivisions shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer systems in compliance with the environmental protection division of [the] state department of natural resources regulations and all local ordinances. 
2.  Where either public water or public sewers or both are not available to a subdivision, and a subdivider shall decide to establish a private water supply system and a private sewer system or allow individual systems then the plans and specifications for such private or individual water and sewage systems shall be approved by the Pierce County health department and/or the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
3.  Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivision to be served by a public water system, and when determined by the community development director for subdivisions served by private water systems. As required by the National Fire Prevention Code and as adopted by the Pierce County board of commissioners, fire hydrants shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be on an eight inch water line main. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed and approved by the county road superintendent before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
4.  Tracer wire or tape, as approved by the county road superintendent, before shall be placed with all buried nonmetallic utility lines (trunk lines and lateral service lines) and underground irrigation systems. 
5.  Street lights shall be required at new street entrances on streets designated or classified as arterial streets where the ADT generated by the new street is 200 or more. Street lights shall also be required at new street entrances on streets designated or classified as collector streets where the ADT generated by the new street is 900 or more. Street lights shall be provided by the developer and installed by the developer in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the county road superintendent. Street lights shall be in place prior to final inspection. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1021) 
Sec. 1022. - Water bodies and watercourses. 
If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the adjacent lots. The planning commission may approve an alternate plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is to be placed that it will not become a County responsibility. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert, bridge, or other structure of a design approved by the county engineer. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1022) 
Sec. 1023. - Pre-owned manufactured homes minimum standards. 
A.  Definitions: 
1.  Pre-Owned Manufactured Home: A manufactured home, which has been previously owned or occupied, by a purchaser or consumer, manufactured after June 15, 1976-the date the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Standards went into effect. (Also known as the HUD Code.) 
2.  Retailer: Any person engaged in the business of buying and thereafter selling, displaying or offering for sale manufactured homes. 
B.  Facilities Required: 
1.  Sanitary Facilities: Every manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub, or shower, and a water closet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstruction. 
2.  Hot and Cold Water Supply: Every manufactured home shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower a supply of both cold water and hot water. 
3.  Water Heating Facilities: Every manufactured home shall have water-heating facilities in a safe, working condition. 
4.  Heating Facilities: Every manufactured home shall have heating facilities in safe, working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for un-vented use and the total input rating of the un-vented heaters is less than 30 BTU per hour cu. ft. of room content. Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall also be prohibited in bedrooms. In lieu of inspecting the heating facilities of a pre-owned home, the retailer may request a heating inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as being in compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to heating systems. 
5.  Smoke Detector: Every manufactured home shall be provided with a State of Georgia approved smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listings. 
6.  Windows: Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one window, which can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. 
7.  Ventilation: Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
8.  Electrical: 
A.  Distribution Panels: Distribution panels shall be installed in compliance with approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused opening covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connection shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
B.  Electrical System: The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed, wired and shall be in a working condition. The pre-owned manufactured homes shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
C.  Third-party Inspection: The retailer may, in lieu inspecting the electrical and heating system of a pre-owned manufactured home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to electrical systems. 
9.  Exterior Walls: The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the occupied spaces of the manufactured home. 
10.  Exterior Siding: The exterior siding of the home shall be free of rot, rust, and must be uniform in appearance. 
11.  Roofs: Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause dampness to the interior portion of the home. 
12.  Interior Floors, Walls [and] Ceilings: Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or dampness or the escape of heating and cooling. 
C.  Inspection: 
1.  All manufactured homes that are over (10) years old will be inspected prior to being placed in Pierce County. 
2.  Manufactured home dealers, restorers, [and/or] renovators, will be permitted to move manufactured homes over (10) years old on their lots or yards for repair. The repair will be completed within 12 months from [the] date of move. 
3.  Pre-owned manufactured homes that change ownership and [are] not moved to a new location will be inspected on site. 
4.  Dealers, restorers, and renovators will have 12 months from date of approval of these standards to repair any pre-owned manufactured homes located on their lots. 
D.  Set up, Tie Down, and Skirting: 
1.  All manufactured homes moved or placed inside Pierce County will be set up and tied down (anchored) in accordance with Article IX, Section 903, Subsections 4-n, and 4-p. 
2.  Skirting will be installed within 45 days after set up. It will be of wood, vinyl, masonry, metal or brick. All skirting, except brick will be painted. 
3.  All utility and storage buildings, including carports will be painted. 
E.  The property on which manufactured homes are placed will have a zoning classification allowing such use, including width and size. 
F.  Existing manufactured homes in Pierce County that are moved to a new site (location) will comply with this section. 
G.  Pre-owned manufactured homes that are ten years old or less will be in compliance with paragraph B, C and D of this section, and will be inspected on the placement site. 
H.  No pre-owned manufactured home will be placed for occupancy until the standards herein are met. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1023) 
Sec. 1024. - New manufactured homes minimum standards. 
A.  Standards: 
1.  New Manufactured homes placed in Pierce County will be in compliance with paragraph B and D of Article X, Section 1023. 
2.  New Manufactured homes will be inspected on the placement site. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1024) 
ARTICLE XI. - STREETS 

Sec. 1101. - Minimum design standards and improvements. 
In order that the various purposes of this Code may be accomplished, all subdivisions hereafter established and all proposed public improvements in existing subdivisions should be developed and improved in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in this article. Final approval shall not be given to a subdivision until all appropriate required improvements have either been installed or an appropriate bond, certified check or contract/performance bond has been posted to secure the installation of such improvements. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1101) 
Sec. 1102. - Streets. 
Street construction plans will be prepared by the developer's engineer and will be submitted with the preliminary plat. The county consultant engineer will review the street construction plans and approve or request revisions or additional documentation. The consultant engineer will do periodic inspection during street construction and will certify that street construction is in compliance with the approved construction plan design. The Developer will be responsible for inspection costs. NOTE: See Section 504, 512, 513, 609, 610, See: Section 513. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1102) 
Sec. 1103. - Continuation of existing street pattern. 
The arrangement of streets in a subdivision should provide for the alignment with, or the appropriate projection of existing major streets in surrounding areas as shown on the Pierce County road classification map. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1103) 
Sec. 1104. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs or centerline offsets in the horizontal alignment of streets across intersections of less than 150 feet shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1104) 
Sec. 1105. - Intersections. 
The centerline of no more than two street rights-of-way shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as the right-of-way centerlines will intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and not less than 80 degrees for a minimum distance of 75 feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1105) 
Sec. 1106. - Distance between intersections. 
New street entrances on streets designated or classified, as arterial streets shall not be less than 660 feet apart from any other new or existing street intersecting with the arterial street from either side. In the case of the divided arterial streets, this distance requirement will not apply to streets on opposite side if a median cut is not included. New street entrances on streets designated or classified, as collector streets shall not be less than 450 feet apart from any other new or existing streets intersecting with the collector streets form either side. Distances between street intersections shall be measured between right-of-way centerlines. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1106) 
Sec. 1107. - Subdivisions on arterial streets. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service lanes or such other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1107) 
Sec. 1108. - Minimum curb and edge of pavement radius. 
Minimum curb or edge of pavements radius shall be determined prior to preliminary plat approval according to the specifications for the street of higher classification at the intersection as specified below: 
1.  Minor Street: 15 feet. 
2.  Sub collector Street: 20 feet. 
3.  Collector Street: 25 feet. 
4.  Higher Order Streets: as determined by the county consultant engineer. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1108) 
Sec. 1109. - Permanent dead-end streets. 
Dead-end streets, designed to be permanent cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 1,800 linear feet measured from the centerline of the nearest intersecting through street to the center of the turnaround. Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside paving edge radius of not less than 50 feet and an inside paving edge radius of not less than 12 feet and not greater than 28 feet, and a right-of-way radius of not less than 70 feet, except where such streets serve two lots or less in which case it shall be 60 feet. The entire 100 feet diameter can be paved. The paving edge equivalent for unpaved streets is 11 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1109) 
Sec. 1110. - Temporary dead-end street. 
Temporary dead-end streets shall meet the requirements of the planning commission for design, maintenance and removal. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1110) 
Sec. 1111. - Street/half-street. 
Half street or streets with a right-of-way less than 60 feet shall not be permitted within a subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1111) 
Sec. 1112. - Interior streets. 
Interior streets within subdivisions shall be so laid out and designed that their use by through traffic and speeding traffic will be discouraged. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1112) 
Sec. 1113. - Street names. 
All streets within a subdivision hereafter established shall be named. No name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with existing street names. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1113) 
Sec. 1114. - Additional right-of-way. 
Any proposed subdivision or public improvement that includes a patted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this Code shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that the minimum right-of-way required by the Code can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said street, then a minimum of one-half of the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated or reserved by such subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1114) 
Sec. 1115. - Traffic control devices. 
Street name markers and such signs, signals and pavement makers, as needed for safety purposes and as determined by the county consultant engineer, shall be provided in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Georgia department of transportation. All traffic control devices shall be provided by the developer and installed and approval by the county consultant engineer for all improvements. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1115) 
Sec. 1116. - Major thoroughfare plan. 
When the major thoroughfare plan of the community shows proposed arterial streets and collector streets within a proposed subdivision, the subdividers shall design the streets [and] the street system within such subdivision to conform to the location and arrangement of such arterial and collector streets. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1116) 
Sec. 1117. - Distance between reverse curves. 
1.  Major Arterial—100 feet. 
2.  Minor Arterial—100 feet. 
3.  Collector Street—100 feet. 
4.  Sub collector Street—75 feet. 
5.  Minor Street—75 feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1117) 
Sec. 1118. - Minimum street centerline elevation (MSL). 
1.  Major Arterial—8.0 feet. 
2.  Minor Arterial—8.0 feet. 
3.  Collector Street—7.5 feet. 
4.  Sub collector Street—7.5 feet. 
5.  Minor Street—7.5 feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1118) 
Sec. 1119. - Drainage/hydrology plans. 
The plans shall be prepared by the developer's land surveyor, or engineer. Curbs, inlets, swales, ditches, pipes, etc., shall be engineered and constructed as required to accommodate storm water run-off quantities. The developer's surveyor or engineer shall submit Hydrology Plans and calculations, which support the proposed improvements to the county consultant engineer for his review/approval. Material requirements for pipe culverts shall be as follows: 
A.  Reinforced concrete pipes or bituminous-coated street pipe culverts shall be required for all cross drainpipes culverts under the roadbed. ADS pipe will not be allowed on roads and streets. 
B.  Reinforced or non-reinforced concrete pipe culverts or bituminous-coated corrugated steel pipe culverts may be used for side drains, longitudinal pipe or storm drain system under parking areas or driveways. Except on State highway right-of-way. 
C.  Non-bituminous-coated corrugated steel pipe culverts will not be allowed. 
D.  The minimum diameter for pipe culverts shall be 15 inches. 
E.  All material shall conform to the current Georgia department of transportation material specifications. ADS pipe is excepted. 
F.  Re-enforced concrete pipe shall have at least one foot of cover. Bituminous-coated corrugated, steel pipe and ADS pipe shall have at least one foot of cover, if paved, (not including paving thickness,) and one and one half of cover, if unpaved. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1119) 
Sec. 1120. - Removal of trees. 
Trees may be retained in the right-of-way provided that the nearest edge of the trunk is not closer than eight feet from the paving edge, 19 feet from the centerline of an unpaved street provided additional right-of-way, or easement shall be provided if needed to allow the construction and maintenance of proper ditches. 
Expectations from the eight-foot or 19-foot requirement may be made for specimen or unique trees as determined by the county consultant engineer. Vertical clearance of all limbs shall be 16 feet above the roadbed surface. Where the right-of-way width is enlarged or widened to accommodate landscaping, screening or specimen trees, the amount of excess of the required right-of-way may be used in the computation of open space in that subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1120) 
Sec. 1121. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1122. - Design standards for unpaved minor streets. 
As provided in Section 610, all unpaved minor streets, which require roadside ditches for proper drainage (see below for streets that do not require roadside ditches) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum specifications and standards: 
A.  Minimum right-of-way required where roadside ditches are required shall be 60 feet, 30 feet right and left of the roadbed centerline. 
B.  Roadbed width shall be a minimum of 30 feet, 15 feet right and left of the centerline with a minimum crown of six inches to centerline. Travel lanes shall have a minimum width of 22 feet right and left of the centerline with grassed shoulders with a minimum width of four feet. All roadside ditches shall require a front slope with a minimum ratio of 3:1. Roadside ditches shall have a flat bottom with a minimum width of 24 inches. All back slopes where required will consist of a minimum slope ratio of 2:1. 
C.  The top six inches of all travel lanes shall be compacted to a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. Test reports shall be supplied by the developer at the requested of the county consultant engineer. Also stabilization requirements of travel lanes shall be based on the county consultant engineer recommendations as to the type and amount. The recommendation shall be based on considering the type of soils, drainage, estimated traffic volumes and types and surrounding topography. 
D.  Test for compaction shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and staggered to right and left and on centerline. 
E.  All drainage culverts for unpaved county streets shall be of material specifications according to the department of transportation, State of Georgia. This is required due to ditch maintenance activity. (See Section 1119 for pipe cover requirements.) 
F.  The grassing requirement will be determined by the county consultant engineer. 
G.  All unpaved County streets that tie into paved streets shall require ramp paving of a minimum of 22 feet in width and 24 feet in length in accordance with minimum paving requirements of these Subdivision Regulations. 
H.  Other streets that do not require roadside ditches shall comply with all requirements except that of ditch widths and back slope regulations. These streets may be constructed on 50 foot right-of-way widths. (See Section 1123.) 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1122) 
Sec. 1123. - Design standards for paved streets. 
All paved streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum specifications and standards: 
A.  Minimum Right-of-Way Width: 
Major Arterial 100 ft. 
Minor Arterial 80 ft. 
Collector Street 70 ft. 
B.  Sub collector Street 60 ft. 
C.  Minor Street 50 feet with Curb and Gutter, 60 feet, with road side ditches. 
D.  Minimum Pavement Widths, Major Arterial: 
2 lane single 24 ft. 
2 lane divided 12 ft. 
4 lane single 48 ft. 
4 lane divided 24 ft. 
E.  Minimum Pavement Width, Minor Arterial: 
2 lane single 24 ft. 
2 lane divided 12 ft. 
4 lane single 44 ft. 
4 lane divided 22 ft. 
At the discretion of the county consultant engineer and the community development director, the minimum right-of-way width for collector, sub collector and minor streets may be reduced by ten feet by providing curb and gutter on each side of the paving edge or an equally acceptable engineering design method with a proper design and installation of catch basins, drop inlets and pipe culverts to provide for storm water run-off. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1123) 
Sec. 1124. - Required paving lanes and widths. 
The developer will be required to pave only two lanes unless the increasing design traffic volumes generated by the development will exceed the two-lane capacity within one year. Acceleration, deceleration and turning lanes will be required where it is determined to be necessary by the county consultant engineer pavement widths shall be: 
A.  Collector Street: 
2 lane single 24 ft. 
2 lanes divided 12 ft. each. 
B.  Sub collector Street: 
2 lane single 20 ft. 
2 lanes divided ten ft. each. 
C.  Minor Street: 
2 lane single 18 ft. 
2 lanes divided nine ft. each. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1124) 
Sec. 1125. - Width of shoulder. 
1.  Major Arterial 8 ft. 
2.  Minor Arterial 8 ft. 
3.  Collector Street 6 ft. 
4.  Sub collector Street 4 ft. 
5.  Minor Street 4 ft. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1125) 
Sec. 1126. - Minimum paving requirements (asphalt). 
A.  Stabilized sub-grade—The top six inches of the sub-grade shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. All embankments shall be placed in six-inch layers compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. Tests for compaction shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and staggered to the right and left on the centerline. 
B.  Test reports shall be supplied by the developer engineer at the request of the county consultant engineer. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1126) 
Sec. 1127. - Pavements structure design. 
The pavement structure shall be designed in accordance with the American Association State Highway Transportation Officials' interim guide specifications, the Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 1 (MS 1) August, 1979 or any equally acceptable engineering design method except that the minimum thickness shall be as shown below: 
1.  Basic Course: Minimum thickness of five and one-half inches of crushed lime rock or graded aggregate or a sufficient thickness, or other material to provide an equivalent total structural number value, shall be required for all streets except minor streets which may be a minimum of four inches. Test for thickness and compaction to be located no more than 500 feet apart staggered to right and left and on centerline. 
2.  Prime: All bases shall be primed with a suitable grade of bituminous prime at the rate of 0.15 or 0.30 gallon per sq. yard and cured a minimum of three days under traffic before the surface course is placed. Areas subject to picking up shall be sanded with blotter sand before traffic is allowed on it. Prime is not required if surface course is placed within three days after the base course is in place. 
3.  Surface Course: Flexible asphaltic concrete type pavements minimum thickness 1.5 inches (GA DOT "E" or "F" Mix). 
4.  Test reports shall be supplied by the developers engineer at the request of the county consultant engineer. Note: All materials and construction to conform with Georgia DOT Standard Specifications, the latest edition. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1127) 
Sec. 1128. - Minimum paving requirements (concrete). 
1.  Stabilized Subgrade: The top six inches of the subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. All embankment shall be placed in six inch layers compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. Tests for compaction shall be located no more than 500 feet apart and staggered to the right and left and on the centerline. Test reports shall be supplied by the developer at the request of the county consultant engineer. Composition requirements of the subgrade are to be determined by the soil survey and DOT specifications. 
2.  Pavement Structure Design: All materials including cement, concrete aggregates, expansion joint material, curing compound, air entraining admixtures and others shall conform to the latest revised standard specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). Concrete shall also be manufactured and delivered in accordance with ASTM standards. If it can be show[n] that adequate strength, surface finish and durability can be obtained on [a] consistent basis with mix designs other than those specified by ASTM, such designs can be used upon approval from the county road superintendent. 
3.  Surface Course: Concrete shall be placed, struck off, consolidated, finished to grade, jointed and properly cured as specified by the county consultant engineer. Minimum thickness for minor streets shall be five inches. Thickness of other street classifications shall be based on anticipated traffic volumes and be approved by the county consultant engineer. 
4.  Open to Traffic: The pavement shall be closed to passenger car traffic for at least three full days or until such time that the minimum compressive strength of the concrete is at least 75 percent of its design strength. Traffic shall be restricted to passenger cars and light trucks for at least seven days after concrete is placed. In all cases approval shall be obtained from the county consultant engineer prior to opening of the pavement to traffic. 
5.  Test reports shall be supplied by the developers engineer at the request of the county consultant engineer. Note: Detailed specifications for concrete paving shall be obtained from the county consultant engineer prior to the submission of construction plans. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1128) 
Sec. 1129. - Private streets. 
Private streets are permitted within the city/county under the following conditions: 
1.  Private streets shall meet the procedural requirements of this Code regarding preliminary and final plat. 
2.  Private streets in subdivisions shall be opened and improved according to the design standards established for public streets. 
3.  All private streets and street name markers shall be maintained by the owners of the property within such subdivisions and the city/county shall have no responsibility whatsoever for their maintenance and repair until and unless improved to city/county street standards and dedicated and accepted by the board of commissioners. 
4.  Private streets shall always remain open for police, fire, ambulance and other vehicles of all government agencies. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1129) 
Sec. 1130. - Private access easements. 
Private access easements shall serve four lots or less (excluding those serving a lot split) and said lots shall not be considered a subdivision. Those lots shall meet the following minimum design standards: 
1.  Minimum easement width of 30 feet; 
2.  Maintained roadbed with a minimum width of 20 feet; and 
3.  Well drained. 
4.  Private easements shall not be accepted by the County or other affected municipalities for roadway maintenance or improvements. 
Exception: Developments for commercial, industrial, or other subdivision (major/minor) standards shall meet requirements set forth in Section 1123 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1130) 
Sec. 1131. - Lanes. 
Service lanes shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and ensured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Such lanes shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  The width of a lane shall be 20 feet. 
2.  Dead-end lanes shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable a dead-end lane shall be provided with a turnaround having a paving diameter of not less than 100 feet, a paving radius of 50 ft. and a right-of-way radius of 70 feet. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1131) 
Sec. 1132. - Blocks. 
All blocks hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the following design standards: 
1.  In order that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas in order to help prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards, the length of blocks on a straightaway where feasible shall not exceed 1,800 feet in length. 
2.  Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when in the opinion of the planning commission crosswalks are necessary to give a direct pedestrian approach to schools, local shopping centers and parks. Said rights-of-way shall not be less than ten feet in width. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1132) 
Sec. 1133. - Curb cuts and access points. 
1.  Ingress/egress openings in concrete, asphalt, rock or other street curbing provisions, commonly referred to as "curb cuts," as well as other means of vehicular access to and from private property, shall be regulated in the several land development districts established by this Code in accordance with the following requirements: 
2.  Size and Spacing of Curb Cuts and Other Access Points: In no case shall a curb cut or other access point be less than nine feet nor more than 50 feet in length. No two curb cuts or other access points shall be closer than 20 feet from each other except in residential land development districts. 
3.  Location of Curb Cuts and Other Access Points: At street intersections, no curb cuts or other access point shall be located closer than 20 feet from the intersecting point of the two street rights-of-way or property lines involved (or such lines extended in case of a rounded corner; or 25 feet from the intersection of two curb lines involved (or such lines extended in case of a rounded corner), whichever is the least restrictive. 
4.  Access Points in the Vicinity of Interchanges: In no case, shall any curb cut, point of access or other means of vehicular ingress and egress be permitted from private property onto any portion of the access ramps, accelerating and decelerating lanes, merge lanes and other facilities specifically designed to facilitate traffic movement onto and off of a limited access highway located at a separate grade. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no curb cut, point of access or other means of vehicular ingress and egress from private property onto a public street shall be permitted closer than 200 feet from the point of tangency of that street's right-of-way line with the outside right-of-way of any ramp providing direct access either to or from a limited access highway located at a separate grade. 
5.  Permits for Access onto State Owned Highway Rights-of-Way: A permit must be obtained from the Georgia department of transportation before curb cuts or another point of access shall be authorized onto state owned highway rights-of-way from abutting property. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1133) 
Sec. 1134. - Obstruction to vision at road intersections. 
In order to minimize accidents at road intersections, the following regulations shall apply in all districts: 
1.  Within the area formed by the rights-of-way lines of intersecting roads and a straight line connecting points on such rights-of-way lines, at a distance of 20 feet from their point of intersection there shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between the height of 30 inches and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each road as measured at the centerline thereof. 
2.  Requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. 
3.  Trees shall be permitted in the clear space provided that foliage is cut away within the prescribed height. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1134) 
Sec. 135. - Visual clearance at private drives and public street intersections. 
At the intersection of any private drive, or entrance, or exit with a public street: no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or sign forming a material impediment to visibility over a height of two and one-half feet shall be erected, planted, placed or maintained. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1135) 
Sec. 1136. - Building setback requirements along major highways and other public roads. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in this Code to the contrary, the following setback requirements shall govern the placement of structures adjacent to state and other public roads. 
County-Wide: 
1.  The setback line from all state highways shall be a minimum of 40 feet from the right-of-way line. 
2.  U.S. 84 East and West: The setback line shall be 40 feet on both sides from the right-of-way of the existing highway and running to the Pierce County line. Unincorporated areas of County: 
3.  For all other county roads, the setback line shall be 75 feet from the centerline of any highway right-of-way or 40 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater. 
4.  For roads and streets in subdivisions: The front side and rear setbacks required by the zoning classification for the property will prevail in all cases. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1136) 
ARTICLE XII. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 1201. - General intent and application. 
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for each use of land within the jurisdiction of this Code. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1201) 
Sec. 1202. - Control (via ownership or lease). 
The control of land upon which the off-street parking is provided shall be the same as the ownership of land on which the principal use is located. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1202) 
Sec. 1203. - Size and access. 
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in usual shape and condition. There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or loading spaces. Such access drive shall not be less than ten feet in width. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1203) 
Sec. 1204. - Number of parking spaces required. 
The number of off-street parking spaces required are set forth in the following table. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1204) 
Sec. 1205. - Parking space requirements by land use. 
1.  Automatic laundry: 
one for each three laundry machines. 
2.  Automobile sales and service garage: 
one for each 400 square ft. of floor area. 
3.  Banks/professional offices: 
one for each 300 square ft. of floor area. 
4.  Bowling alleys: 
one for each alley. 
5.  Churches, temples, or places of worship: 
one for each five seats based on maximum seating capacity. 
6.  Schools, public buildings, theaters, auditoriums, areas and places of assembly area, private clubs, community buildings, social halls and lodges: 
one for each five seats based on capacity. 
7.  Country clubs, golf clubs, gun clubs, tennis clubs and organizations designed to provide outdoor sporting or recreational activities: 
one for each five members. 
8.  Single-family dwelling: 
two for each unit. 
9.  Multiple family dwellings: 
1.5 for each unit bedroom. 
10.  Food store, supermarket: 
one for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area. 
11.  Funeral homes, mortuaries: 
20 for each parlor. 
12.  Furniture, appliance stores: 
one for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area. 
13.  Hospitals, sanitariums, and nursing homes: 
one for each six patient beds, plus one for each two employees. 
14.  Hotels and Motels: 
one for each guest room plus one for each three employees. 
15.  Manufacturing, industrial plant, research laboratory, bottling plant: 
one for each two employees on the largest shift, plus one for each company vehicle. 
16.  Manufacturing and industrial concerns with retail business on largest shift: 
one for each two employees plus one on premises for each 150 sq. ft. devoted to sales or Service. 
17.  Medical offices: 
four for each doctor, plus one for each two employees. 
18.  Restaurants, beer parlors, night clubs: 
one for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area. 
19.  Rooming houses, boardinghouses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities: 
one for each two beds. 
20.  Service station: 
two for each pump. 
21.  Wholesale and warehouse concerns: 
one for each two employees, plus one for each company vehicle, plus one for each 50 sq. ft. of retail sales or service. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1205) 
Sec. 1206. - Location of off-street parking areas. 
1.  The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the residence. 
2.  Parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the main building of the principal use. 
3.  Two or more principal uses may utilize a common area in order to comply with off-street parking requirements, provided that the number of spaces required for each use is met. 
4.  Portions of the public right-of-way on minor streets may be allowed for maneuvering incidental to parking when determining parking area requirements for individual uses. 
5.  On collector streets, major streets, and controlled access highways, parking facilities shall provide space outside the public right-of-way for maneuvering incidental to parking. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1206) 
Sec. 1207. - Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
Areas suitable for loading and unloading motor vehicles in off street locations shall hereafter be required at the time of the initial construction of any building or structure used or arranged to be used for commercial, industrial, governmental or multi-family residential purposes. Such off-street loading areas shall have access to a public alley or street and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, the computation of which shall not be included in the off-street parking requirements. 
1.  Amount of Area Required for Each Loading Space: Each off-street loading and unloading space required by the provisions of this Code shall be at least ten feet wide, 50 feet long and 14 feet high. Such space shall be clear and free of obstructions at all times. 
2.  Location of Off-Street Loading Areas: Required off-street loading and unloading areas shall in all cases be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street parking requirements as listed herein. 
3.  Adequacy of Loading Area: All uses, whether specified in this Code or not, shall provide off-street loading areas sufficient for their requirements. Such space shall be adequate so that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operations shall stand in or project into a public street walk, alley or way. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1207) 
Sec. 1208. - Number of off-street loading spaces. 
1.  Retail business uses with from 4,000 to 25,000 square feet in total floor area shall have a minimum of one off-street loading space. 
2.  Wholesale, industrial, governmental and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals and educational institutions shall provide one space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area. For anything in excess of 25,000 square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 

 
3.  Multi-family residences with less than ten dwelling units: None. 
4.  Multi-family residence with ten to 30 dwelling units: one space. 
5.  Multi-family residences with more than 30 dwelling units: one space for each 30 dwelling units or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1208) 
Sec. 1209. - Handicapped parking space requirements. 
Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following scale: 

 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1209) 
ARTICLE XIII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 1301. - General sign provisions. 
1.  A building permit and a zoning compliance inspection shall be required prior to the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise specified. Once a sign has received a Development Code Compliance Approval, a Pierce County sign permit decal shall issue and displayed in the lower left hand corner of the sign face. 
2.  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this article. 
3.  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
4.  No signs, except as otherwise specified, shall exceed the height limit of the district in which they are located. 
5.  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1301) 
Sec. 1302. - Prohibited signs. 
1.  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
2.  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
3.  Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles or fence posts are prohibited. 
4.  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
5.  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1302) 
Sec. 1303. - Regulations for specific types of signs. 
1.  Home Occupation Signs: One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted. 
2.  Temporary Subdivision Signs: Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. They shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
3.  Private Directional Signs: Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or agent may be erected and maintained, provided: 
a.  The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet, and not in excess of four feet in length, and 
b.  Not more than one sign is erected on each 500 feet of street frontage. 
4.  Roof Signs: 
Not more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. 
No roof sign structure shall extend more than 25 feet above the elevation on the roof. 
5.  Wall Signs: Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Signs on the Front Surface of a Building: The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of the building, so long as the figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the land development district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
b.  Signs on the Side and Rear Surface of a Building: The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of [a] building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively, so long as this figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the development district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
c.  The combined sign area on the front, side and rear surface of a building must not exceed the total sign area permitted within the development district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
d.  Projecting Signs: Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than 24 inches from the wall. 
e.  Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet. 
6.  Illuminated Signs: Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
7.  Outdoor Advertising Signs: Outdoor Advertising Signs visible from all state highway rights-of-way shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Uniform Size: The outside measurements of all such signs shall be no greater than 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length, with or without trim. 
b.  Illumination: All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting, including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
c.  Height above State Highway Grade: All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent state highway pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the highway surface. 
d.  Extrusions Prohibited: Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
e.  Number of Signs per Location: Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side) facing the same direction. 
f.  Spacing: Sign locations shall be no less than 750 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
g.  Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
h.  Locations Limited per Quadrant: A maximum of three sign locations shall be permitted per interchange quadrant provided that spacing requirements can be met. 
i.  Swamp and Historic Area Locations Prohibited: No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a swamp land area or an area of designated historic interest. 
j.  Advertisement Limitations: Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Travel service facilities including lodging, gas, food, camping; 
2.  Areas of scenic beauty; 
3.  Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and 
4.  Any combination of the above-listed facilities. 
k.  Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1303) 
Sec. 1304. - Temporary signs. 
The community development director, in compliance with provisions and subject to the standards herein, is authorized to issue permits for the erection and maintenance of temporary signs for a period not to exceed 30 days (except as provided for political signs) at the expiration of which period the permittee shall remove such temporary signs. Temporary signs placed within the city limits of Blackshear shall comply with the provisions set forth in the Blackshear Municipal Code Section 58-5. 
1.  Permitted Temporary Signs: Business signs calling attention to a special, unique, or limited activity, service, product or sale of limited duration. 
2.  Permitted Sign Types: 
a.  Non-projecting wall signs; 
b.  Ground Signs; and 
c.  Streamers, banners, flags, pennants and similar temporary signs as herein defined. 
3.  Number, Height, Area and Location: 
a.  Permitted Number: as determined by the community development director to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose, provided that no more than four permits for temporary business signs shall be issued for the same land development lot in one calendar year. 
b.  Maximum Height: as determined by the community development director to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public safety and considerations related to the material and manner of constructions and the size and location thereof. 
c.  Maximum Area: as determined by the community development director to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public [safety] and considerations related to the material and manner of construction and the size and location thereof. 
4.  Permitted Location: 
a.  Temporary Business Signs: Subject to the same regulations as business signs. 
b.  Political Signs: on private property (with consent of the owner) and along and upon public street right-of-ways (but not across, over or extending into or onto the paved portion of any public street) as determined by the planning commission in accordance with public safety requirements and considerations related to the material and manner location thereof. All political signs must be removed within ten days after the election. 
c.  Other Permitted Temporary Signs: Other Permitted Temporary Signs as determined by the community development director to be reasonably necessary and appropriate for the intended purpose and in accordance with public safety. 
5.  Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1304) 
Sec. 1305. - Exempt signs. 
The following types of signs are generally exempt from the provisions of this article and do not require a permit, excepting those found to be in violation of the provisions of this article. 
1.  Plaques or tables, denoting names of buildings and date of erection or names of buildings or dates cut into any masonry surface. 
2.  Traffic and other signs erected and maintained by the city or other governmental agency, legal notices and other similar signs required by law to be posted. 
3.  Decorations displayed in connection with civic, patriotic or religious holidays. 
4.  Flags, emblems and insignia of political, civic, philanthropic, religious or educational organizations temporarily displayed for noncommercial purposes. 
5.  One non-illuminated "for sale," "for rent" or "for lease" sign not exceeding six square feet in area in residential districts and 20 square feet in other than residential districts and located not less than two feet back from the street right-of-way line, unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
6.  Permitted home occupation signs subject to the regulations of this Code. 
7.  A bulletin board not over 15 square feet in area for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when the sign is located on the premises of said institution. 
8.  One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial, selling and development agencies is permitted of any work under construction, alteration, or removal. Such signs shall be removed from the site within 30 days after the completion of the project. 
9.  Signs directing traffic movement onto a premise or within a premise, not exceeding three square feet in sign area for each sign. A maximum of four directional signs shall be allowed per lot. 
10.  Signs giving notice of events and activities sponsored by civic, patriotic, religious organizations or individuals for nonoccupational purposes. 
11.  Signs advertising political candidates' parties, provided such signs may not be erected or maintained more than 60 days prior to applicable elections, shall be removed within ten days following the general election. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1305) 
ARTICLE XIV. - DEVELOPMENT CODE FEES 

Sec. 1401. - Violation of Code. 
Any person violating any provisions of this Code shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each violation, with each day that the violation considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1401) 
Sec. 1402. - Fee schedule. 
A complete schedule of fees for rezoning applications, appeals, variances, conditional use or conditional exception applications, building permits, certificates of occupancy, sign permits and final inspection permits shall be maintained in the community development director's office. The joint planning commission may change the fee structure upon the recommendation of the community development director as it deems necessary to fund the department's budget as described in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(A), (B). 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1402) 
Sec. 1403. - Building permit fees. 
The following fees shall apply to all construction activities regulated by this Code: 
1.  For construction of new single-family and multi-family residences, the building permit fee shall be in accordance with administrative fee schedule of the Pierce County Code. 
2.  For all other new buildings used for agricultural purposes, new construction, Alterations and additions to existing buildings the building permit fee shall be in accordance with administrative fee schedule of the Pierce County Code. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1403) 
Sec. 1404. - Plat and subdivision plat review fees. 
1.  Non Subdivision $30 for 1 lot and $10 for each additional lot up to 4 lots 
2.  Subdivision Fee—Major $200 for application fee 
Minor $100 for application fee 
3.  Minor Subdivision or PUD $50 for the first five lots and $10 for each additional lot up to nine lots 
4.  Major Subdivision or PUD $100 for the first ten lots and $10 for each thereafter 
5.  Re-subdivision of Land $100 plus $10 per lot 
6.  Vacation of Plat $50 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1404) 
Sec. 1405. - Reserved. 
Sec. 1406. - Other permit fees. 
1.  Rezoning $350 
2.  Development Code amendment $300 
3.  Variance (by code inspector $300 
or board of appeals) 
4.  Permit to fill, grade or excavate in $150 
a designated Flood Hazard District 
5.  Conditional Use and Exceptions $300 
6.  Board of Appeals (for non-variance requests) $150 
7.  Temporary Permit $50 
8.  Certificate of Occupancy included with Building Permit Fee in Section 1403 
9.  Manufactured Home Permit $150 (MOVE ON) 
(10 yrs. Old or Older requires inspection - Fee $100) 
10.  Manufactured Home Relocation $100 
(10 yrs. Old or Older requires inspection - Fee $100) 
11.  Advertising Signs $50 
12.  Directional Signs and On-premise $25 
Signs (privately-owned) 
13.  Salvage/Junk Yard License and Renewal $200 
14.  House Moving Fee - includes inspection fee $200 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1406) 
Sec. 1407. - Exemptions from fees. 
1.  Petitions to amend the text of the Code when filed by the board of commissioners. 
2.  Petitions to amend the Official Zoning Map, applications for conditional use permits and variances if the land is owned by a municipality and the governing body submits the petition or application. 
3.  Zoning permits for municipally-owned buildings. 
4.  Permits for construction or maintenance of farm drainage ditches and soil conservation practices in a Flood Hazard District or flood plain area. 
5.  Any amendment or alteration to the Development Code or Official Zoning Map that originates with the county commission, its staff or the community development director's staff. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1407) 
Sec. 1408. - Disposition of fees. 
1.  Fees collected by the community development director or staff shall be accounted for and paid into the general fund of Pierce County as are other fees collected by the County. A receipt shall be issued for each fee collected. 
2.  All fees are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1408) 
[ARTICLE XV. - RV PARK] 

Sec. 1501. - RV park. 
1.  Intent: 
The intent of this district is to provide a sound and healthy residential area sufficient to meet the unique needs of tourists living in recreational vehicles (RV's), to protect RV parks from encroachment by incompatible uses, and to encourage the proper placement of RV parks, to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for RV parks. It is intended that all RV parks be a desirable living areas providing adequate open space. These parks shall be permitted in PRC zone only. 
2.  Uses of Right: 
The following uses shall be permitted in the RV Park: 
a.  RV's both Dependent and Independent; 
b.  Playgrounds and parks; 
c.  Laundromats, Bathhouses and; 
d.  Accessory buildings and structures (see Section 1001); 
e.  Tents and other Dependent Camping Structures. 
3.  Park Regulations: 
Unless otherwise specified in this Code and the rules of the department of human resources, tourist accommodations, uses of right in the RV park shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum RV Park area: 
1 acre. 
b.  Minimum area for RV's, Buildings, Accessory Structures: 
There shall be not less than 15 feet clear space between trailers and buildings, not less than ten feet between trailers and internal driveways. 
c.  Minimum setback from exterior street: 
30 feet. 
d.  Minimum setback from park perimeter property lines: 
15 feet. 
e.  Minimum open space requirement: 
5 percent of the net acreage (net acreage being the total acreage less the area of streets, drives, and other infrastructure). 
f.  Minimum width of interior drives with unobstructed public access: 
20 feet, with 50 feet radius cul-de-sacs as to prevent dead-ends. 
g.  RV Parks shall have visual buffers such as shrubbery and/or opaque fencing at least six feet in height between the park and adjacent non-RV Park uses. Buffer strips shall meet the requirements of Section 1006. 
h.  Each RV Park shall be graded and drained so that rainwater will not stand in pools or puddles. 
i.  All RV/Camping spaces shall abut on an interior drive of gravel or similar all-weather surface; parking spaces of gravel or similar all-weather surface sufficient to accommodate at least two automobiles shall be located on each RV/Camping space. Each space is to be clearly identifiable with a sign at least four inches. 
j.  Grounded and weatherproof electrical outlets supplying at least 115 volts, 30 amps shall be provided at each RV/Camping space. Power lines shall be located underground or at least 18 feet above ground. All electrical work and material shall comply with State and Local Codes. 
k.  A sewer connection of not less than three inches in diameter shall be furnished at each RV space. Suitable fittings shall be provided at each sewer connection to permit a watertight junction to be made with the trailer outlet. Each sewer connection shall be so constructed that it can be closed and when not in use shall be capped to prevent escape of odors. 
l.  A water tap connection of not less than ¾ inches in diameter shall be furnished at each RV space. 
m.  All RV Parks shall be required to provide one dumpster space for every 25 RV/Camping spaces, or every portion thereof. Each dumpster space shall be enclosed on three sides by a chain-link, solid brick, concrete block, or uniformly painted board fence, and screened from sight from the adjoining residences and adjacent streets. These spaces should be so designed and developed as to provide easy access to the county/private maintenance vehicles. The number of dumpsters leased from the county/private company by the RV Park owner shall be determined by need. 
4.  Sign Regulations: 
a.  Signs, illuminated or non-illuminated; not to exceed a combined total sign area of 100 square feet; and that where RV Park abuts a state primary highway, only one business identification sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed a total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park. 
5.  Permit for RV Park: 
a.  Initial permit for park shall be reviewed by planning commission and approved by county commission/city council. 
b.  Initial permit shall be accompanied by permit fee as provided for in Section 1402 along with scaled surveyed site plan showing all structures, RV/Camping spaces, driveways, entrances, electrical/plumbing layout, and any other info required by community development director. 
c.  Initial permit may require E & S plans and Soil Erosion site plan. This requirement will be determined by the city/county engineer. 
d.  Initial permit must be approved by health department before planning commission makes final recommendation. 
e.  RV Park permit must be renewed annually. An annual fee will be collected (Section 1402) and an annual inspection conducted by the code department. Upon passing inspection, the community development director may issue the permit without further review. If the park fails inspection, the owner has the right to appeal the community development director's decision to the governing commission/council, otherwise, the director's decision is final. 
f.  A permanent housing unit (Site Built or Manufactured House) will be allowed for a grounds keeper. 
g.  No RV shall be allowed to remain in the park for more than 12 months. Any RV that is to remain parked for longer than 60 days will be required to obtain a secondary permit from the code department. This permit shall be good for 60 days. This permit shall not be renewable upon expiration. The fee for this permit shall be set forth in Section 1402. 
(Ord. of 2016, § 1501) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2005 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2005 Code, as updated through January 3, 2017, which are included herein. Sections of the 2005 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 