5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
1/227
THE CODE OF MACON COUNTY, GEORGIA
____________
Published in 2013 by Order of the Board of County Commissioners
____________
OFFICIALS
OF
MACON COUNTY, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
A. Richmond Felton, Chairman, District 3
Bob Melvin, Vice-Chairman, District 5
Mickey George, District 4
Gordon Sutton, District 1
Ben Haugabook, District 2
County Commissioners
____________
Regina M. McDuffie
County Manager
____________
Jon Coogle
County Attorney
____________
Roselyn Starling
County Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Macon County, Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances, resolutions, and motions, as adopted by the Board of County
Commissioners through November 19, 2012. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end
thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use
of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance, resolution, or motion included herein.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
2/227
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included.
A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each
section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the
dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of
chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their
proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come
between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be
included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of
divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or
division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents
a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a
chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the
letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which
may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER CHT:1
RELATED LAWS RL:1
SPECIAL ACTS SA:1
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1
CODE CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS INDEX SARLi:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
Indexes
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
3/227
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which
are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and
employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the
particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the
publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be
reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new
pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it
will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly
recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition,
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Paula Freeman, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Mrs. Regina McDuffie, County Manager, and Mr. Jon L. Coogle, County Attorney, for their cooperation
and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a
Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the dayto-day administration of the county's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Macon County, Georgia. Editorial
enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes;
cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law ref
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
4/227
(a)
(b)
(c) (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Sec. 1. - Districts.
There is established a board of commissioners for Macon County consisting of five members.
For the purpose of electing members of the board of commissioners, Macon County shall be divided into five commissioner
districts. The five commission districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts established pursuant to the
final order entered on August 26, 2002, in Macon County, Georgia, et al v. McCarthy, Case Number 5:02-cv-255-4(HL), United
States District Court for the Middle District of Georgia, Macon Division, but as modified by the descriptions in and attached to
and made a part of this Act and further identified as: Plan: maconccsb-2011 Plan Type: Local User: bak".
When used in such attachment, the term 'VTD' (voting tabulation district) shall mean and describe the same geographical
boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the
State of Georgia.
The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe
individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial
census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Macon County which is not included in any such district described in
that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population
according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia.
Any part of Macon County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be
included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be
included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States
decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia.
Except as otherwise provided in the description of any education district, whenever the description of such district refers
to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States
decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia.
[Reserved.]
The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Macon County from Commission Districts 1, 3, and 5 shall
be elected at the state-wide general election in 2002. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for
terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Macon County from Commissioner Districts 2 and 4 shall be
elected at the state-wide general election in 2004. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for
terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
Successors to members elected under subsections (e) and (f) of this section shall be elected at the state-wide general election
next preceding the expiration of such terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four
years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 as they existed on January 1, 2002, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner
Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and, on and after the effective date of this Act,
such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and
representing their respective districts as newly described under this section.
(2002 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 482), p. 4061; 2011 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess. HB47EX), § 1)
Editor's note—
Section 2 of 2011 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess. HB47EX) states that "[t]he Board of Commissioners of Macon County which existed on December 31,
2012, is continued in existence but on and after January 1, 2013, shall be constituted as provided in this Act. The Board of Commissioners of
Macon County so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the "board," shall continue to have the powers, duties,
rights, obligations, and liabilities of that board as existed immediately prior to January 1, 2013."
Sec. 2. - Election.
[This provision has been superseded by state laws.]
Sec. 3. - Jurisdiction.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
5/227
[This provision has been superseded by state laws.]
Sec. 3[a]. - Election, how held.
[This provision has been superseded by state laws.]
Sec. 4. - Regular sessions.
Be it further enacted, that they [board of commissioners] shall hold a session on the first Tuesday [and third Thursday] in each month at
the court-house, and may convene an extraordinary session whenever it may, in their judgment, be necessary, and shall have power, when in
session, to punish for contempt, and may, at their discretion, order the sheriff or his deputy to attend their sessions.
Sec. 4[a]. - How commissioned; oath.
Be it further enacted, that the commissioners so elected shall be commissioned by the Governor of the State of Georgia, and their term
of office shall begin on the first day of January next succeeding their election; and before entering upon the duties of said office, they shall
take and subscribe the oath now required by law, before the Probate [judge] of said County of Macon, who shall file and keep said oath in his
office.
(1912 Ga. Laws (Act No. 421), p. 419, § 1)
Sec. 5. - Terms.
[This provision has been superseded by 2011 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess. HB47EX), which is codified as section 1 in this Special Act.]
Sec. 6. - Vacancies.
Be it further enacted that should a vacancy occur in the office of commissioner as herein provided for, the said board of commissioners
shall appoint a qualified citizen of the commissioner's district affected by such vacancy, and such appointee shall hold said office until the
next general election for county officers in said county; such appointee shall take the oath prescribed before the Probate [judge] of said
county before entering upon the discharge of his duties.
(1925 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), p. 694, § 1)
Sec. 7. - Administer oaths.
[Reserved.]
Sec. 7[a]. - Compensation.
The chairman of the board of commissioners of Macon County shall receive an annual salary of $7,200.00, payable in equal monthly
installments from county funds. Each of the other commissioners of such board shall receive an annual salary of $6,000.00, payable in equal
monthly installments from county funds.
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 164), p. 4048, § 1)
Sec. 8. - Chairman.
At the first meeting in January [each calendar year], the board shall select a chairman from its members. He shall preside at all meetings
of the board when he is present and shall be the executive officer of said board. He shall sign, as chairman thereof, all contracts and county
warrants which shall also be countersigned by the clerk of said board. He shall, when deemed necessary, call special meetings of said board
and shall, through the clerk, give such notice as may be required by law. The chairman shall have a right to vote on all matters before the
board [and can also make a motion].
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 121), p. 3849, § 2)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
6/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sect. 9. - Vice-chairman.
At the first meeting in January each [calendar] year, the board shall select a vice-chairman from its members. The vice-chairman shall
preside at board meetings in the absence of the chairman and shall discharge all other duties required by the chairman.
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 121), p. 3849, § 2)
Sec. 10. - Clerk; bond; duties; salary.
Be it further enacted that at said first meeting of said board, they shall elect a clerk of said board who shall hold his office unless
removed therefrom by said board, for neglect of duty, incompetency, or other cause. Before entering upon his duties as clerk, the person so
elected shall give a bond with good and sufficient security, to be approved by said board of commissioners, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties as such clerk. It shall be the duty of said clerk to attend all meetings of said board, to file and preserve all its
records and papers, to countersign, officially, all warrants, orders and contracts, and to record all papers required to be recorded and to keep
full and fair minutes of all proceedings of said board, including the assessment of taxes, and he shall also keep a separate and detailed
account in a well-bound book of all orders drawn on the county treasury, showing for what drawn and on what fund drawn; and he shall
perform all other duties which may, from time to time, be required of him by said board. Said clerk shall receive a salary, as his compensation
and shall receive no other costs or fees whatever.
(1925 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), p. 694, § 2)
Sec. 11. - Unanimous vote of three to pass any order.
Be it further enacted, that at any meeting of said board when only three of the commissioners are present, it shall require a unanimous
vote or concurrence to pass any order, or transact any business, and in the absence of such concurrence, all business attempted to be
transacted shall be null and void.
(1912 Ga. Laws (Act No. 421), p. 419, § 1)
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 321), page 4532. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes
following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious
misspellings have been corrected without notation. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and
effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current
language has been printed. For stylistic purposes, the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has
been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Section catchlines have been editorially supplied. Additions made for
clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - [Denitions.]
As used in this Act, the term:
"Board" means the Macon County Board of Elections and Registration.
"Commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Macon County.
"County" means Macon County.
"Election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter
20 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act.
Sec. 2. - [Board of elections and registration.]
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
7/227
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A., there is created, effective July 1, 2003, the Macon County Board of
Elections and Registration. The board shall have the powers and duties of the former Macon County election superintendent relating to the
conduct of primaries and elections and shall have the powers and duties of the Macon County Board of Registrars relating to the registration
of voters and absentee balloting procedures.
Sec. 3. - [Board composition and terms of oce.]
The board shall be composed of three members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of Macon County. All
members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Macon County. The Macon County Board of
Elections and Registration shall select a chairperson from among its members.
The initial terms of office of two members shall expire December 31, 2005, and upon the appointment and qualification of
their respective successors. The initial term of office of the remaining member of the board shall expire December 31, 2007,
and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor.
Sec. 4. - [Chief election ocial appointed; duties.]
The board shall appoint a person to serve as the chief election official of Macon County. Such position shall be part time or full time as
determined by the board and such person shall be paid a salary to be set by the board and payable from county funds. The chief election
official shall generally direct and control the administration of elections and voter registration in Macon County. The chief election official
shall be supervised by the board and shall be subject to removal from office by the board, with or without cause. The chief election official
shall not be a member of the board nor an elected official.
Sec. 5. - [Board members.]
Each member of the board shall:
Serve for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that initial terms of office shall be
as provided in subsection (b) of Section 3 of this Act;
Be eligible to be reappointed to succeed himself or herself and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written
notice of such resignation to the commissioners and to the clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County; and
Be subject to removal from the board at any time for cause, after notice and hearing, by the chief judge of the Superior
Court of Macon County.
Sec. 6. - [Appointment adavit.]
The appointment of each member shall be evidenced by the appointing authority filing an affidavit with the clerk of the
Superior Court of Macon County no later than 30 days preceding the date on which such member is to take office. Such
affidavit shall state the name and residence address of the person appointed and certify that such member has been duly
appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County shall be notified of interim appointments
and shall record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members.
The clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County shall record each such certification on the minutes of that superior court and
shall certify the name of each member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to
the members as provided by law for county registrars.
Sec. 7. - [Vacancy; appointment of successor.]
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of a term by reason of removal, death, resignation, or
otherwise, the appointing authority which is required under Section 3 of this Act to make the appointment to the office upon expiration of the
term shall appoint a successor to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner set forth in Section 3 of this Act.
Sec. 8. - [Members to be certied; oath.]
The first members of the board under this Act shall be appointed as provided in this Act and take office on July 1, 2003. The
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
8/227
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County.
Before entering upon the duties of office, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for county
registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest.
Sec. 9. - [Powers and duties of the board.]
The Macon County Board of Elections and Registration shall be empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the
conduct of primaries and elections as election superintendents pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the
O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code."
The board is empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting
procedures as boards of registrars pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election
Code."
This Act is intended to implement the provisions of subsection (b) of Code Section 31 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. and shall be
construed liberally so as to effectuate that purpose.
Sec. 10. - [No member should hold public oce.]
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective public
office, and the position of membership of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for an elective
public office.
Sec. 11. - [Conicts with valid rules or regulations of the board.]
Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee of a political party under the provisions of subsection (c) of Code
Section 21-2-111 of the O.C.G.A. with regard to the conduct of primaries shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of
the board.
Sec. 12. - [Primaries not otherwise required by law; authority to conduct elections and primaries.]
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require or prohibit joint primaries or to require or prohibit the commissioners or any
other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required by law.
The board shall have the authority to serve as municipal registrar and to conduct municipal elections and primaries for any
municipal corporation located within Macon County if such municipal corporation has entered into a contract for that purpose
with the Macon County Board of Commissioners.
Sec. 13. - [Preparing and distributing material.]
With the approval of the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of preparing and
distributing material solely to inform and instruct electors of the county adequately with regard to elections. No material distributed by the
board shall contain or express, in any manner or form, any commentary or expression of opinion or request for support with respect to any
political issue or matter of political concern.
Sec. 14. - [Organization, rules and management of the board.]
The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, may elect from among its membership a vice-chairperson,
shall determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and
otherwise take such actions as are appropriate to the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall
conflict with general law.
Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority vote of a quorum of the members of the board.
Sec. 15. - [Meetings.]
The board shall fix and establish by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes directives governing the execution of
matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold meetings at the county courthouse or at the place of meeting of the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
9/227
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
commissioners. These meetings shall be held quarterly in years in which there are no county-wide elections and monthly in
years in which there are county-wide elections. Any specially called meetings held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the
board shall be held only after the notification of the time and place of the holding of such meeting has been communicated in
writing to the chief election official to provide public notice of the meeting as required by law. All meetings of whatever kind of
the board shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open meetings.
The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions that shall be amended to include additions or deletions. Such
written record shall be subject to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to inspection of public records.
Sec. 16. - [Chairperson; compensation of members.]
The chairperson of the board of elections and registration shall chair all meetings of the board and be the spokesperson for
the board.
The members of the board shall receive compensation [as set by the board of commissioners] for their service as members of
the board.
All amounts payable under this section shall be paid from the funds of the County.
Sec. 17. - [Clerical or other employees.]
Subject to appropriation of funds by the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds to provide for such proper
and suitable administrative offices and for such clerical assistance and other employees as the board shall deem appropriate. Compensation
for such administrative personnel shall be paid by the board under the county personnel system wholly from county funds. This section shall
not be construed so as to require the board to expend any funds simply because they are authorized to do so under this Act. Employees of
the board shall be considered county employees for pay, benefits, sick leave, vacation, and for other purposes.
Sec. 18. - [Selection, appointment and training of poll workers.]
The board [or its designee] shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections.
Sec. 19. - [Chairperson to have custody of all materials and facilities.]
On July 1, 2003, the Election Superintendent of Macon County and the Board of Registrars of Macon County shall be relieved from all
powers and duties to which the board of elections and registration succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver thereafter to the
chairperson of the board, upon the chairperson's written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records,
and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties.
SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of the sections of the Special Acts and Related Laws, as well as any amendments thereto.
Ga. Laws
Year
Act No. Page Section Section
this Special Acts/
Related Laws
1872 317 434 Art. I (note)
1912 421 419 1 Art. I, § 4[a]
Art. I, § 11
1925 72 694 1 Art. I, § 6
2 Art. I, § 10
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
10/227
1983 164 4048 1 Art. I, § 7[a]
1985 121 3849 2 Art. I, § 8
Art. I, § 9
2002 482 4061 Art. I, § 1
2003 321 4532 Art. II (note)
2011 Ex. Sess. HB47EX 1 Art. I, § 1
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of
municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3.
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Macon County, Georgia," and
may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Macon County Code" or the "County Code."
State law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.
Sec. 1-2. - Denitions and rules of construction.
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. In the construction of this Code and
all ordinances found herein, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the board of county commissioners of Macon County, Georgia, or the context clearly requires otherwise:
Board of commissioners, board of county commissioners, commissioner, board, or governing authority. The term "board of
commissioners," "board of county commissioners," "commissioner," "board," or "governing authority" means the board of county
commissioners of Macon County, Georgia.
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Macon County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of
time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or
the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday,
the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the
last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall
have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
11/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events
are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases
the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable:
"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply.
"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination.
"Either …or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Macon, State of Georgia.
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes
greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the board of commissioners.
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers,
trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
Names of officers, and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Macon County"
were added thereto.
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number.
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed."
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general
provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable.
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as
well as an individual.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
12/227
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or
accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned.
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such
person is absent, that person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such
person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence.
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal.
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive.
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Macon County, Georgia.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways.
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Georgia.
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct,
bridge and the approaches thereto within the county.
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially
on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance
unless expressly so provided.
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part
of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present tenses.
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days.
Written or in writing. The terms "in writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.
State law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1;
construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6.
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code.
In all interpretations of this Code and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of county commissioners,
keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and
clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.
State law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1.
Sec. 1-4. - Substantive compliance with Code.
A substantial compliance with any requirement of the Code, or ordinances, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and
held sufficient, and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided by the enactment.
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
13/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes
appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the
user of the Code and shall have no legal effect.
State law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7.
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of county commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional
by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without
the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
State law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3.
Sec. 1-7. - Eect of repeal or expiration of ordinance.
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or
any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or
the ordinance expired.
When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without
express words to that effect.
Sec. 1-8. - Prior oenses, penalties and rights not aected by adoption of Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the county repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be
continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the
county under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.
Sec. 1-9. - Rates, charges, and fees established.
Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the board of
county commissioners, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the county pursuant to the regulations or
requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the board of county commissioners, and such changes
shall be considered an amendment to this Code.
Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the board of county
commissioners, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar
amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by
the board of county commissioners by ordinance, resolution or motion.
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances not aected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of
the following:
Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code;
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
14/227
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of
the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness;
Any contract or obligation assumed by the county;
Any ordinance or resolution establishing or fixing the salaries, retirement and pension plans, benefits, personnel policy,
and/or administrative procedures for county officers or employees not otherwise enumerated in this Code;
Any right or franchise granted by the county;
Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public
way in the county;
Any appropriation or budget ordinance;
Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
Any ordinance rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map;
Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations;
Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county;
The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code;
Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code;
Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county;
Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking
limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or
inconsistent with this Code;
Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision;
Any ordinance or resolution establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for the county that are not otherwise
enumerated in this Code;
Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature, or which is referred
to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect;
Any ordinance or resolution that is temporary, although general in effect;
Any ordinance or resolution that is special, although permanent in effect; or
Any ordinance or resolution the purpose of which has been accomplished.
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to
the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters,
sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the
Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of county commissioners.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the
section number of this Code.
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of
Macon County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
15/227
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
section reads as follows:…."The new section may then be set out in full as desired.
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter
number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code.
By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to
the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of county
commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code
will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by
the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as
the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the
Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the
supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
county to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of county
commissioners. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15.
State law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1.
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations.
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by
statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by
state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a
misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by
reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform
an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
16/227
(c)
(d)
section.
Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or
is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance, the doing of any act is required
and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by
state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed one year, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor;
and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and
labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent
injunctive relief.
State law reference— Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and
prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of
additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum sentences and fines which
may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers, election, term, compensation, Ga.
Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga.
Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; board of
commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-
20(a); organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-
22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY MANAGER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.
Sec. 2-19. - Oce created.
The office of county manager of Macon County, Georgia, is hereby created by the adoption of this article.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 1)
Sec. 2-20. - Appointment; restrictions.
The county manager shall be appointed by vote of a majority of the entire board of commissioners of the county (the board) to serve at
the pleasure of the board for an indefinite term.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
17/227
(1)
(2)
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 2)
Sec. 2-21. - Qualications.
The county manager shall be chosen by the board upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with specific reference to
actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this article.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 3)
Sec. 2-22. - Removal; separation.
The county manager is the employee at will of the board and is not covered by or governed by any personnel policy which has been or
may be adopted by the board. The county manager may be removed by the vote of a majority of the entire board without cause. However,
the reason for removal shall be set forth in writing and provided to the county manager within 48 hours after the vote. The county manager
shall be entitled to such severance pay as may be provided by any employment agreement executed by the county manager and the board,
or, if no such agreement exists, the county manager shall received severance pay in an amount equal to 90 days of base salary. Nothing in
this section shall alter or annul the right of the board to terminate the services of the county manager without cause at any time, subject only
to the above provisions. The board requests a minimum of four weeks notice when the county manager decides to leave employment with
the county.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 4)
Sec. 2-23. - Compensation.
The county manager shall be paid an annual salary, the amount to be fixed by the board. The board may review and adjust the
compensation annually based on performance. For that purpose, the board may make an annual performance evaluation.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 5)
Sec. 2-24. - Acting county manager.
By letter filed as a part of the official records of the county the county manager shall designate a county officer or employee as acting
county manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of county manager during the county manager's temporary absence or
disability. The board may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer or employee of the county to serve as acting
county manager during the county manager's temporary absence or disability. In the event the position of county manager becomes vacant,
the board may appoint an acting county manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties of county manager temporarily pending
appointment of a new county manager.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 6)
Sec. 2-25. - Ocial bonds.
The county manager and, before performing any duties, any acting county manager shall be required to execute and deliver a good and
sufficient bond payable to the board in the amount of $100,000.00, the premiums for which shall be paid by the county.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 7)
Sec. 2-26. - Duties.
The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county. The county manager shall be responsible to the board for the
proper administration of the affairs of the county as herein provided. It shall be the county manager's duty:
To see that all ordinances, rules and regulations of the board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by county
officers or department heads, other than by elected constitutional officers, are faithfully executed;
To attend all meetings of the board and/or its committees, with the right to take part in discussions in accordance with
any rules adopted by the board, but having no vote. The county manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings
of the board and non-scheduled committee meetings;
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
18/227
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
To serve, if so directed by the board, ex officio as county clerk, to perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities of th
To prepare and submit to the board a proposed annual budget and a proposed capital program, and to execute the
budget and capital program adopted by the board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or
authorized by the board;
To examine regularly at periods fixed by the board the accounts, records and operations of every county board,
commission, department, office and agency which received appropriations from said board; to make monthly reports to
the board on county fiscal and other affairs; to keep the board fully advised on the financial conditions and future needs
of the county, and to make such recommendations on county affairs as the county manager deems necessary for the
efficient operation of the county;
To submit to the board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the county for the preceding year;
To confer with and advise all other elected or appointed officials of the county who are not under the immediate control
of the board, but who receive financial support from the board;
To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the county, and supervise and
regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for the county within such limitations and under such rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the board;
To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county for which the board has responsibility, and all
employees of the county, and to direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and the construction,
maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and to have the care
and responsibility for the maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the county;
To appoint, and when, in the county manager's discretion, the welfare of the county requires it, and subject to any
personnel policy which may be in effect or which may hereafter be adopted, to suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all
employees for whom the board is responsible, except the county attorney, who shall be appointed directly by the board.
The county manager may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within that
department. The county manager must give the board 24 hours' advance notice before taking any disciplinary actions
against an employee;
To fix the salaries of all officers and employees of the county, subject, however, to pay grades and scales adopted by the
board, and budget appropriations, and subject to supervision and control by the board;
To supervise the programs of financial management, personnel administration, procurement, and risk management;
To perform such other duties as may be required of the county manager by the board; and
To keep the board updated on all projects, employment decisions, budget matters, etc., on a scheduled basis and an
agreed upon methodology.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 8)
Sec. 2-27. - Performance of duties.
The county manager shall perform the county manager's duties under the direction of the board, and shall be responsible to the board
as a body, but not to individual board members. No member of the board shall individually direct the county manager or interfere or attempt
to interfere in the performance of the county manager's duties, and the board shall, except for the purpose of formal inquiries and
investigations, deal with county employees subject to the county manager's direction or supervision solely through the county manager.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 9)
Sec. 2-28. - Budget development.
The county manager shall, no later than the last day of the eighth month of each fiscal year, submit to the board a budget plan
and calendar for developing a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, and shall formulate and submit to the board, no
later than the last day of the 11th month of each fiscal year, a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an
accompanying message.
The message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
19/227
(c)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
financial policies of the county for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major
changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes,
summarize the county's debt position, and include such other material as the county manager deems desirable.
The proposed budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all county funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, and,
except as otherwise required by law, shall be in such form as the county manager deems desirable or the board may require.
The proposed budget shall, at a minimum, include a clear general summary of its contents, and show in detail all estimated
income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal
year. It shall indicate in separate sections:
Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed for each fund by organization unit when
practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and
The anticipated income and expense and surplus or deficit for the ensuing year for each utility or other enterprise fund
operated by the county.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 10)
Sec. 2-29. - Capital program development.
The county manager shall consult with the heads of county departments, constitutional officers, and the county planning
commission, and prepare and submit to the board a proposed five-year capital program each year. It shall be submitted to the
board simultaneously with the submission of the proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
The capital program shall include:
A clear general summary of its contents;
A list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five
fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each;
Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure;
The method of financing upon which each capital expenditure is to be reliant; and
The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 11)
Sec. 2-30. - Community planning and development.
The county manager shall, subject to supervision by the board:
Develop plans and programs to advance the health, safety, general welfare, and physical and economic development of
the county, and shall pursue grants-in-aid that may be available from time to time to help finance implementation of such
programs;
Monitor the county's planning activities, including those undertaken in response to the Georgia Planning Act and the
Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act; and
Cooperate with and coordinate the community improvement activities of independent authorities and agencies, county
constitutional offices, the county planning commission and county departments and other organizational components of
the county government as necessary.
(Ord. of 10-21-2010, § 12)
Secs. 2-31—2-48. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-49. - Purpose and statement of intent.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
20/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
This employee handbook of personnel procedures is intended to be a general s
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
21/227
(a)
(b)
The county commissioners are the appointing authority. However, the county manager is the designee to administer the policies. The
county manager may, in turn, appoint other designees, primarily department heads to assist in administering these policies. Constitutional
officers shall be the appointing authority for their respective departments and shall administer this policy within that department.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 1.03)
Secs. 2-52—2-75. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN
Sec. 2-76. - Establishment and amendment.
The appointing authority may establish an employee pay and classification plan. The nature and content of the plan, if established, will be
at the discretion of the appointing authority and are subject to be changed or discontinued at any time without prior notice to employees.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 2.01)
Sec. 2-77. - Interpretation of job description.
One element of the classification plan may be job descriptions. The job descriptions are descriptive and not restrictive. They are intended
to indicate the general kinds of duties, responsibilities, and job requirements normally associated with the position, but are not intended to
be exhaustive. Employees may be assigned other duties not included in the descriptions and also may be required to work across
departmental lines.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 2.02)
Secs. 2-78—2-97. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE BY EVALUATION
Sec. 2-98. - Objectives.
The appointing authority may utilize a performance appraisal system for evaluating employees. The type of system utilized will
be at the discretion of the employer and is subject to change without prior notice to the employee.
The employee performance evaluation is a management tool that may be used in an attempt to effectuate higher levels of
employee productivity and may also be a factor in determining salary increments. Performance evaluations may also be used
for any other purposes the appointing authority deems appropriate.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 3.01)
Sec. 2-99. - Qualications.
In no case should employees view the employee performance evaluation as a right or obligation of the county. Rather, the evaluation is a
management tool to be used at the discretion of the appointing authority.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 3.02)
Sec. 2-100. - Time and period of evaluation.
If the appointing authority elects to utilize an evaluation system in any given year, such authority will determine the time the evaluation
will take place and the period of time to be covered by the evaluation.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 3.03)
Sec. 2-101. - Procedure for ling evaluation disagreements other than through the grievance process.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
22/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, such employee may submit, within ten days following the evaluation, a
written statement to the appointing authority, and the statement will become a part of the employee's permanent file. This action does not
constitute a grievance or appeal, but is merely an administrative procedure requiring no action or response by the appointing authority or
their designees.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 3.04)
Secs. 2-102—2-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT
Sec. 2-131. - Reimbursement procedures.
Mileage allowance. Employees will be reimbursed at a rate to be set by the county commissioners when specifically authorized
to use their personal vehicle in lieu of a county vehicle in the performance of official county duties. In the event it is necessary
for an employee to put fuel in a county vehicle at the employee's personal expense, the employee will be reimbursed for the
cost of the fuel, provided that a valid receipt is submitted along with the expense voucher.
Common carrier. If a common carrier is used for official travel, reimbursement will be at the tourist rate. Receipts must be
submitted. A department head or higher authority must approve use of common carrier prior to travel.
Lodging. Reimbursement will be made for the actual and reasonable cost of lodging while on travel to locations more than 80
miles from the county. Copies of hotel or motel receipts shall be attached to expense voucher for payment.
Other expenses. Employees may be reimbursed for other expenses incidental to official travel and normally will be limited to
taxi fees, baggage handling fees, official phone calls, parking fees, and registration fees for conventions, seminars or
workshops. Any other expenses will be reimbursed at the discretion of the county commissioners.
Per diem. Employees shall receive a per diem for each day they are away from the county on official business. The per diem
shall cover all meal costs, tips and incidental expenses. No receipts shall be required. The per diem shall be established by
resolution of the county commission from time to time.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. IV)
Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYMENT
Sec. 2-161. - Employee categories designated.
There may be several categories of employees as follows:
Full-time. This includes employees who work 40 hours or more per week in positions which have been created with the
anticipation that it will be necessary to maintain the existence of such positions indefinitely on a continuous year-round
basis. This in no way implies that the incumbent can expect continued employment as a "property right." This definition
refers to the position only, and not the incumbent employee. As full-time employees, these workers are subject to all
rules and regulations contained in this article and receive all fringe benefits as provided by these personnel procedures,
including vacation and sick leave.
Acting. Normally, this occurs when an existing employee is placed in a higher level position (usually full-time), until an
eligible replacement can be hired. Normally, a position of this type would not exceed six months but may be extended if
the need occurs. (If acting employees are not existing employees, then, by definition, they are temporary employees).
Employees in these positions are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures. Also, since the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
23/227
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
category of acting position involves existing employees and full-time positions, employees are eligible for all fringe
benefits as provided by these personnel procedures, including vacation and sick leave, provided they meet the full-time
requirement.
Substitute. This includes employees who are hired to temporarily fill existing positions, usually on an intermittent and "as
needed' basis. These are essentially the same as temporary employees except that they involve substitutes for existing
employees. These positions also may be full-time or part-time, but the substitute employee in the position is a temporary
employee. The duration of the position is temporary, and while the duration of this position may vary it will not normally
be in excess of six months. As a substitute employee, the worker is subject to all rules and regulations contained in these
procedures. However, a substitute employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
Part-time. This includes employees who work less than 40 hours per week. As part-time employees, these workers are
subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures. However, a part-time employee is not eligible for
fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
Temporary. This includes employees who are working in positions which have been created for a period of six months or
less and which shall remain in existence only as long as the temporary work situation requires it. A temporary position
may also be either full-time or part-time. As temporary employees, these workers are subject to all rules and regulations
contained in these policies. However, a temporary employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave or
vacation leave.
Seasonal. This includes employees who are working in positions that have been created for a seasonal period (i.e.,
summer work program, summer recreational program, etc.). These positions also may be either full-time or part-time.
The duration of the position may vary but normally will not be in excess of six months. As seasonal employees, these
workers are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures. However, a seasonal employee is not
eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.01)
Sec. 2-162. - Method of lling promotional positions.
The county has developed a recruitment plan that does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national
origin, age, mental or physical handicap, or political affiliation.
In general, the county attempts to promote from within, providing that such promotions are consistent with nondiscrimination
laws and fair employment practices.
Existing employees desiring to apply for position vacancies that are promotional in nature must complete an application for
the position in the same manner as prescribed for all other applicants.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.02)
Sec. 2-163. - Minimum age for employment.
The minimum age for employment of full-time and acting employees shall be 18 years of age unless otherwise established by state law.
The minimum employment of all other categories shall be 16 years of age. There is no mandatory retirement age.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.03)
Sec. 2-164. - Nepotism (hiring of relatives).
Two members of an immediate family will not be employed under the same supervisor. Nor will two members of an immediate family be
employed at the same time by the county, regardless of the administrative department, if such employment will result in an employee
supervising directly or indirectly, a member of the employee's immediate family. This policy applies to promotions, demotions, transfers,
reinstatements, and new employees. The provisions of this section will not be retroactive, in that no action is to be taken concerning those
members of the same family employed at the time of the adoption of this section. Immediate family is defined as wife, husband, mother,
father, brother, sister, son and daughter.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.04)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
24/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(c)
Sec. 2-165. - Recruitment for vacant positions.
All full-time vacancies shall be publicized by posting announcements and by other such means as necessary to ensure
obtaining well qualified candidates for the positions. The announcement shall specify the title and salary range of the vacant
position, minimum qualification requirements, manner of making application, final date on which applications shall be
received, and other pertinent information. Every reasonable effort shall be made to publicize vacancies so that all interested
persons are informed and qualified persons are attracted to compete.
Recruitment may be closed to consider only qualified current employees or may be open for public competition. When a
vacancy occurs, a recruitment plan will be developed by the county manager and the hiring authority based on current
organizational needs.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.05)
Sec. 2-166. - Application process.
Application shall be made on forms provided by the county manager. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience,
and other job-related information. All applications shall be signed by the person applying. All persons must be informed that the application
will be placed in an active file for a period of six months.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 5.06)
Sec. 2-167. - Working out of class.
In order to cover vacation periods of other employees, vacancies, illnesses and similar occurrences, an employee may be
assigned temporarily to a position with a different pay. Where the temporary assignment is for a period constituting a full work
week or longer, a non-exempt employee shall be paid according to the following schedule:
If the pay for the temporarily assigned position is less than the employee's pay, the employee will receive the employee's
normal rate of pay.
If the pay for the temporarily assigned position is greater than the employee's pay, the employee shall be paid the
employee's normal rate of pay plus two percent.
Exempt employees may request a temporary pay adjustment for periods where the employee is temporarily assigned to a
position with a higher pay for a period of 30 days or longer. The employee will receive the pay rate for the assigned position or
a 2.5 percent increase in the employee's pay, whichever is greater.
No employee shall work out of class for more than six months.
(Mo. of 4-21-2011(02))
Secs. 2-168—2-187. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - WORKING TEST
Sec. 2-188. - Determination of employability and work performance; certication.
As a final test of employability, the first six months of employment in positions of original appointment, promotion or transfer to other
positions which have different qualification shall be a working test to determine if the employee can be considered as being capable of
performing satisfactorily in that position. In cases where a position requires state certification, the employee will remain on working test until
the certification is obtained even though it may exceed six months. If an employee is terminated during the working test period, such
employee is not entitled to a hearing.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. VI)
Secs. 2-189—2-214. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - DISCIPLINE
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
25/227
(a)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Sec. 2-215. - Progressive discipline.
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. County officials
advocate progressive discipline when applicable. The action taken will depend on the degree and the circumstances of the
violation. An employee who fails to satisfactorily perform assigned duties or who violated established procedures will be
disciplined. The officials recognize six degrees of progressive disciplinary actions that fall into two general categories:
Reprimands:
Oral.
Written.
Adverse actions:
Suspension without pay.
Disciplinary demotion.
Dismissal.
As an "at-will" employer, the county is not required to give causes of disciplinary action either in these policies or at the time of
the adverse personnel action, nor is the county required to dismiss only for any so-called "just cause." On the other hand, the
county officials feel that effective communications can enhance the efficiency and morale of the organization. Therefore, the
following list of possible reasons for disciplinary action is intended to communicate to the employee several general reasons
that are universally accepted as causes for discipline in public sector employers. These reasons are neither mutually exclusive
nor collectively exhaustive. The appointing authority may discipline for any combination of reasons, for reasons not listed
below, or for uncommunicated reasons at any time as long as the employee's constitutionally protected liberty interests are
not violated.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.01)
Sec. 2-216. - Causes or possible causes of disciplinary actions.
Some causes or possible causes of disciplinary actions are:
Chronic tardiness or absenteeism;
Negligence in performing assigned duties;
Inefficiency in performing assigned duties;
Inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties;
Insubordination;
Misconduct;
Commission of a felony or a crime involving morale turpitude;
Conduct reflecting discredit on the county or department;
Failure to report to work without justifiable cause;
Political activity that is prohibited by federal, state or local laws; and
Sexual harassment.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.02)
Sec. 2-217. - Drug free policy.
It is the policy of the county board to provide a safe, healthy, and secure work environment for all employees. It is also the policy of the
county board to ensure that all employees perform their job duties in a safe, productive, and efficient manner. Finally, it is the policy of the
county board to ensure that its equipment and facilities are maintained and utilized appropriately so as not to pose a risk of harm. As the use
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
26/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
a.
b.
1.
2.
3.
4.
of drugs and the misuse of alcohol are inconsistent with these policies, to protect the health safety and welfare of employees, citizens, visitors
and persons who interact with county employees during the course and scope of their employment, county has adopted this drug free policy
which shall be strictly enforced.
Prohibited conduct. The following violations of the drug free policy constitute gross misconduct and shall result in severe
disciplinary action up to and including discharge:
Unauthorized use, possession, sale or solicitation for the purpose of purchase/sale of drugs or alcohol on county
property or while the employee is on duty.
Hindering, obstructing or refusing to cooperate or participate in any investigation involving suspected violations of
this policy. This includes, but is not limited to, providing false, misleading or incomplete information in response to
any inquiry from a supervisor related to a suspected violation of this policy. It also includes refusing to undergo
drug or alcohol testing.
Hindering, delaying or obstructing drug or alcohol testing, including but not limited to, tampering with a sample or
interfering in any way with the chain of custody.
Reporting to work or engaging in any work activity whatsoever on behalf of the county in a condition which could
pose a threat of harm to the employee or any other person, or reporting to or engaging in any work on behalf of the
county in a condition which could impair the ability to satisfactorily perform any essential function of the job, due to
the use of drugs or misuse of alcohol. The presence of any detectable amount of drugs, or the presence of alcohol
in the concentration of 0.04 breath alcohol content (BAC) or greater, creates a presumption that the employee is in
violation of the county drug/alcohol free policy. No CDL employee shall perform their safety sensitive job functions
within four hours after using alcohol.
Abusing or misusing prescription drugs or over the counter medication when such conduct could reasonably
interfere with the safe or satisfactory performance of any essential job functions. This includes, but is not limited to,
the use, possession, sale or solicitation for the purpose of purchase or sale any prescription medication for which
the employee lacks a valid prescription.
Prohibited substances.
"Drugs" refers to marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, methamphetamines, opiates (including heroin and codeine),
phencyclidine, and all other "controlled substances" as defined in title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia.
"Alcohol" includes any beverage or substance containing alcohol manufactured for the primary purpose of personal
consumption.
"Prescription drugs" means any substance, which is attainable only by lawful prescription from a physician.
"Over the counter medication" includes any substance which does not require a prescription but which has the
capacity to affect a person physically, mentally or emotionally, or which could otherwise affect a person's ability to
safely perform any essential job function.
When testing is required.
Pre-employment. Applicants for positions requiring a commercial driver's license (CDL) or safety sensitive positions
will be tested after a conditional offer of employment has been extended. An applicant who refuses drug testing or
who tests positive shall not be extended a final offer of employment.
Random testing. CDL positions and safety sensitive positions shall be subject to random testing as follows:
Tests will be ordered on a random, unannounced basis from the pool of identified CDL and safety sensitive
employees.
A computer based random number generator will be used to select employees, thereby allowing each
employee an equal chance of being tested each month.
At least 50 percent of the employees in the CDL/DOT random testing pool will be selected for substance abuse
testing, and at least 25 percent of employees for breath alcohol testing. Actual percentages will be as required
by the federal highway administration (FHWA).
At least two percent to ten percent of other county approved safety sensitive employees per department will
be selected and tested for drugs and alcohol each year.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
27/227
5.
c.
d.
e.
f.
1.
2.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
3.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
4.
5.
g.
1.
2.
An employee's name will remain in the pool after being selected so that every employee will have an equal chanc
selections are made. Therefore, it is possible that any CDL or safety sensitive employee who is randomly selected
randomly selected again in the same year.
After-care testing. Persons in safety sensitive positions returning to work from an approved treatment program for
drug or alcohol abuse may be subject to unannounced testing at the discretion of the department director for a
period of six months following the employee's return to work.
Return to duty testing. CDL and safety sensitive employees who are absent from work or any leave for more than 30
days shall be tested for drugs immediately upon returning to work and before performing any job duties.
Position testing. Employees who are transferred, promoted, or demoted into a CDL or safety sensitive position from
a non-CDL/non-safety sensitive position will be tested for drugs before performing any job duties in the new
position.
Reasonable suspicion. All employees will be subject to testing when there is a reasonable suspicion that the
employee has used drugs or misused alcohol in violation of this policy. Grounds for reasonable suspicion testing
include, but are not limited to:
Personal observation of the employee's job performance, appearance, behavior, speech, or odor creating a
reasonable suspicion that the employee has used drugs or alcohol in violation of this policy.
Personal observation of the employee's job performance, appearance, behavior, speech, or odor which causes
reasonable suspicion that the employee:
Is impaired by drugs or alcohol;
Has used drugs or alcohol while on duty; or
Poses a threat to the safety of such employee or others due to the use of drugs or misuse of alcohol in
violation of this policy.
Specific and objective facts indicating that an employee's drug or alcohol use may have caused or been a
contributing factor to an on-duty motor vehicle accident. Alcohol testing should be completed within 32 hours
of the accident. The following facts, if present may independently or collectively, depending upon the
circumstances, give rise to reasonable suspicion:
The appearance, behavior, speech, or odor of an employee immediately prior to or following the
accident;
The employee left or attempted to leave the accident scene without legal authority or permission to do
so;
The employee acted contrary to a safety rule, established safety practice or otherwise engaged in
demonstrably unsafe behavior for which there is no reasonable explanation;
The employee was arrested or received a traffic citation;
The employee or any person received medical attention as a result of the accident;
The employee has been involved, as a contributing factor in a pattern of repetitive on-duty motor vehicle
accidents, whether or not they involved actual or potential injury.
Drugs, drug paraphernalia, alcohol, or containers indicating the presence of drugs or alcohol are observed or
discovered in a location in which the employee had primary control or access, including but not limited to,
desks, lockers, equipment, machines, or vehicles. The employee must have accessed the location within eight
hours prior to the discovery of such items.
Specific and objective facts showing the employee diluted, tainted, tampered, or interfered with any breath,
blood, or urine sample, or any tests required under this policy, or that the employee attempted to do the
same.
Post accident testing.
When a CDL or safety sensitive employee may have caused or contributed to an on-duty motor vehicle
accident involving the loss of human life; or
When a CDL employee has been involved in an on-duty motor vehicle accident where the employee received a
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
28/227
h.
1.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
2.
(i)
(ii)
3.
4.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(5)
a.
citation, medical attention is required and administered away from the scene, or if a vehicle is towed from the
accident site, alcohol testing should be completed within two hours and drug testing within 32 hours of the
accident. This testing is to be performed in addition to any drug or alcohol testing ordered by law enforcement
authorities.
Consent. When any employee has consented to drug or alcohol testing, the consent must be signed by the
employee and a supervisor from the employee's department, or an authorized person from the county
administrator. The following may require a reasonable suspicion drug or alcohol testing:
Any supervisor who has received training in the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and impairment
may require an employee to undergo reasonable suspicion testing for drugs or alcohol based upon:
The personal observation of the employee by the trained individual;
Personal observation of the employee by another employee who has fully disclosed the observations to
the trained individual; or
Observation of the employee by a nurse or physician engaged in the treatment or evaluation of a work
related injury who has disclosed such observation to the trained individual.
Any untrained supervisor may require reasonable suspicion testing for drugs or alcohol based on personal
observation of the employee under the following circumstances:
The employee has been independently observed by a trained supervisor, or
A trained supervisor has reviewed the underlying facts and agrees that reasonable suspicion exists to
require a test.
Any trained supervisor or trained member of risk management may require reasonable suspicion drug or
alcohol testing following a work-related accident based upon personal observation of the employee or upon
review of the specific and objective facts underlying the accident.
In addition to any supervisor trained in detecting drug and alcohol impairment, any employee trained in risk
management may require reasonable suspicion of drugs or alcohol testing under subsections (3)f.3, (3)f.4 and
(3)g of this section.
Persons subject to testing.
CDL employees. Employees who are required to possess a CDL license as a job requirement are subject to all testing
provision of this policy, including but not limited to, pre-employment and random testing.
Safety sensitive employees. Safety sensitive employees occupy positions where a lapse in judgment or impaired
physical/mental ability in performing any essential job function could reasonably result in a significant threat of
harm to the employee, fellow employees, citizens, inmates, or others. Safety sensitive positions include but are not
limited to those which, as part of the essential job functions, require the performance of law enforcement duties as
a POST-certified law enforcement officer; possession of a firearm; providing emergency medical, rescue, or fire
suppression service; interacting with incarcerated persons, performing duties essential to drug interdiction; or
performing duties which directly affect public health or safety. A complete list of safety sensitive positions is
maintained in the county manager's office and all job descriptions for safety sensitive positions are designated as
such.
Job applicants. Applicants for safety sensitive and CDL positions are subject to pre-employment testing after a
conditional offer of employment has been extended.
Non-CDL/non-safety sensitive employees. All non-CDL and non-safety sensitive employees are subject to drug and
alcohol testing unless specifically excluded.
Employees in office of constitutional officers and independent elected officials. Employees in the offices of
constitutional officers and independent elected officials are subject to this policy to the extent that it has been
adopted by the respective constitutional officer or independent elected official. If so adopted, the term "department
director" is intended to include "constitutional officer" and "elected official."
Procedure.
Whenever there is a reasonable suspicion to require drug or alcohol testing under this policy, the department
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
29/227
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
(6)
director or designee shall be notified of the circumstances necessitating the testing as soon as possible.
All circumstances causing reasonable suspicion to require drug or alcohol testing shall be fully documented by the
supervisor and all appropriate witnesses as soon as possible.
All county issued equipment, property, and facilities, including but not limited to, desks, lockers, and vehicles
(collectively "materials") are subject to inspection at any time and for any reason. No employee shall have any
privacy interest whatsoever in any county issued materials. No personal property may be searched unless the
owner of the property has consented or a search is otherwise legally permissible.
Alcohol screening will be conducted using a federally approved evidential breath-testing device. An initial screening
test of two breath samples will be conducted first, and if an initial test detects any level of alcohol, a second
confirmation test of two additional breath samples will be completed.
Drug testing will check for marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, methamphetamines, opiates (including heroin and
codeine), and phencyclidine (PCP). Testing will involve initial screening tests and confirmation of positive tests by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analysis. Test results will be certified, to the fullest extent possible,
under the circumstances by a laboratory approved by the United States Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS).
All positive test results for drugs will be interpreted by a physician approved by the county as a medical review
officer (MRO) before the results are reported to the county. Prior to notifying the county, the MRO will make
reasonable efforts to contact the employee for the purpose of allowing the employee to offer an alternative medical
explanation for the positive test result. If the MRO is able to contact the employee and determines there is a
legitimate medical explanation for the positive test, the result will be communicated as negative to the county. The
MRO's inability to contact the employee before providing test results to the county will not void the test result or
make the test result unusable in any subsequent disciplinary action. Because the employee is present for
interpretation of an alcohol test, the procedure concerning prior notification by the MRO is not applicable.
Upon notification by the MRO of a verified positive result for the drugs, the employee may request that the
remaining portion of the employee's split specimen undergo a second confirmation test at the employee's expense
at a DHHS laboratory of the employee's choice. If the test conducted by the laboratory selected by the employee is
negative for the presence of drugs, a third test may be made at the county's sole expense at a separate DHHS
facility of its own choosing. The results of the third facility will be determinative. If the results from the third facility
are negative, all prior positive tests will be disregarded and shall not be the basis for any disciplinary or adverse
action.
The county will make reasonable efforts to notify the employee of a positive drug test within five days from the date
it receives the test results. Because the results of a breath alcohol test are immediately available, this provision will
not apply to alcohol tests conducted in such a manner.
Any employee ordered to be tested, based upon reasonable suspicion, shall be immediately removed from duty,
escorted to the testing facility and taken home (unless other suitable arrangements have been made to transport
the employee). Under no circumstances will the employee be allowed to drive home. The employee shall be placed
on paid administrative leave pending the results of the test.
Any employee who tests positive for drugs or alcohol shall immediately be relieved from duty, placed on paid
administrative leave, and sent home pending disciplinary action, if appropriate.
Any refusal to consent to drug or alcohol testing or property search will be considered insubordination and gross
misconduct, and subject the employee to severe disciplinary action up to and including termination.
In the event that it is not reasonable under the circumstances to conduct an alcohol test based on a breath test, the
county reserves the right to test for the presence of alcohol by a blood test analysis. If this procedure is used, the
county will attempt to notify the employee of the results within five days after the results are received. An MRO will
not be used when a blood test for alcohol is conducted.
Employee assistance program. Any employee who voluntarily self-identifies as user of drugs or abuser of alcohol, prior to
being asked or required to take drug/alcohol testing, will not be subject to disciplinary action if the employee seeks
immediate assistance and treatment through the county's employee assistance program or a similarly available
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
30/227
(7)
(8)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
treatment program. Failure to comply with all requirements of a treatment program, or continued use of drugs or alcohol
during or after completion of such a program, will result in an appropriate disciplinary action if such use caused the
employee to violate this policy. Nothing in this policy is intended to discriminate against any person on the basis of
addiction to drugs or alcohol, or on the basis of an individual's medical history of addiction to drugs or alcohol pursuant
to the Americans with Disabilities Act. However, the county reserves the right to take into account, for purposes of
employment or disciplinary action, any history of criminal activity related to such use to the extent such may lead to
disqualification from employment.
Arrests for drug or alcohol related offenses. Any CDL or safety sensitive employee who is arrested for a drug or alcohol
related offense must notify their department director of the arrest immediately. The county will make determination at
that time whether the arrest causes a temporary or permanent disqualification from holding that position, or constitutes
grounds for disciplinary action. All convictions for alcohol or drug related offenses must be reported immediately by a
CDL or safety sensitive employee to their department director. The county reserves the right to take appropriate action
based upon such conviction. All non-safety sensitive employees and non-CDL holders who are required to operate a
county vehicle as a regular part of their jobs must report any drug or alcohol arrest, temporary or permanent suspension
of driving privileges, and drug/alcohol related conviction to their department director immediately. The county reserves
the right to take appropriate action, including relieving the employee from duty, transferring the employee to a nondriving position, or instituting disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Confidentiality. All reports of test results for drug and alcohol, searches, or any employee referral, or participation in an
EAP program or treatment program for addictive disorders, will be maintained in strict confidence. Any person
authorized to have access to such confidential information, who, without authorization, discloses it to another person
shall have engaged is gross misconduct and be subject to severe disciplinary action up to and including termination. The
confidentiality of such information shall not apply to any use by or communication to the county, or where the
information is relevant to the county's defense in an administrative or civil action. Such information may also be
disclosed to the extent required by any federal, state or local law, statute, ordinance or regulation.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.03; Res. of 8-18-2011)
Sec. 2-218. - Disciplinary actions.
The five disciplinary actions are defined as follows:
Reprimands. A reprimand is a formal means of communicating to the employee a warning that a problem exists and that
it must be corrected. There are two degrees of formality, the oral reprimand and the written reprimand.
Oral reprimand. In an oral reprimand, the supervisor should verbally and privately explain to the employee that the
employee is being reprimanded and describe the problem and what must be done to correct the problem.
Written reprimand. In the written reprimand, the employee should receive a written statement describing the
problem and what must be done to correct the problem. The reprimand should also contain a statement describing
the probable consequences of not correcting the problem. If the employee is at work, the written statement should
be given to the employee during a private interview.
Adverse actions. An adverse action is an action taken for any reason by the appointing authority or designees that results
in a disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary demotion, or disciplinary dismissal.
Suspension without pay. An employee may be suspended without pay by the appointing authority or its designee.
The suspension without pay should not exceed 30 days.
Disciplinary demotion. An employee may be demoted from one position to a lower position for disciplinary reasons
if a lower position is open and if the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A disciplinary
demotion should include a decrease in salary.
Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary reasons when all other alternatives have failed to solve
the problem or, in the judgment of the county manager, dismissal is the only appropriate action.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.04)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
31/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
a.
b.
Sec. 2-219. - Notice of proposed adverse action.
The department head or supervisor should give the employee a notification of the proposed adverse action prior to the effective date of
the action. (The specific timetable depends on the type of adverse action and is outlined in section 2-223(1) and (2). The notice should
contain:
The effective date of the action and that it is only a proposed action and will become final only if the employee does not
respond or if it is later upheld in an appeal process;
The charges or reasons for the action (see sections 2-215 and 2-216);
A statement informing the employee that said employee may respond to the county manager or other named official. In
a case of an employee of a department subject to the jurisdiction of an elected constitutional officer, the employee may
respond to the elected constitutional officer; and
A warning that a failure to respond to the county manager, or the appropriate elected constitutional officer will result in
the loss of an opportunity to appeal the adverse action any further and that the proposed action will be implemented as
proposed.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.05)
Sec. 2-220. - Employee response to proposal of adverse action.
The employee must respond in writing to the county manager or the appropriate elected constitutional officer within the time period
outlined in section 2-223(1) and (2), depending on the nature of the proposed action.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.06)
Sec. 2-221. - Named ocial response to employee.
The county manager or the appropriate elected constitutional officer, after considering the employee's response, should arrange for a
hearing and notify the employee within the time frames outlined in section 2-223(1) and (2), hold the hearing, and notify the employee of the
results.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.07)
Sec. 2-222. - Postponement of deadlines.
If the employee responds to the county manager or the appropriate elected constitutional officer, the county manager or the appropriate
elected constitutional officer may postpone the deadline for the employee's response by a specific number of days to conduct further
investigation. If the deadline for response is postponed, the effective date of the proposed action should be postponed by as many days.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.08)
Sec. 2-223. - Procedures for administering adverse actions.
These procedures are divided into two categories: disciplinary action involving dismissal and disciplinary action involving adverse actions
other than dismissal.
Cases where the discipline involves disciplinary suspension without pay or disciplinary demotion.
In order to discipline an employee by suspending the employee without pay, or demoting the employee, the
employee should be notified (15 days prior to the proposed effective date) by the department head or supervisor of
the type of disciplinary action that is being proposed, the reasons therefor, and the effective date(s) of the action.
The notice should include a statement that indicates to the employee that the employee may request a hearing
before the county manager or the elected constitutional officer supervising the department in which the employee
is employed provided that the employee files a written request within five days of receiving the notice of adverse
action.
The county manager or the appropriate elected constitutional officer should then schedule a hearing, within ten
days of receiving the request and so notify the employee. No action should be implemented before the employee
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
32/227
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
receives a hearing before the county manager or the appropriate elected constitutional officer, if a hearing is
requested.
The employee may bring witnesses and have legal counsel. If witnesses are brought in, the county manager and/or
designee or the elected constitutional officer may cross examine or otherwise question the witnesses. Under no
circumstances, however, should this hearing be considered or treated as an adversarial hearing. This hearing is
designed solely to obtain facts and does not alter the at-will status of the employee or create any property interest
in the position of employment with the county. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply.
The county manager or the elected constitutional officer may elect to dismiss, uphold, or modify the proposed
adverse action and should notify the employee in writing, within five working days of hearing, of the decision.
Disciplinary action shall be implemented following the county manager's decision.
The notification should also include a statement to the employee not employed by an elected constitutional officer
that indicates the employee may appeal the county manager's decision, provided the employee responds in writing
to the county manager within five days of receipt of the county manager's notification. If the employee does not
respond within five days, the employee waives the possibility of further appeal. If an appeal is requested, the county
manager should arrange for a hearing before the county commissioners. The decision of an elected constitutional
officer shall not be subject to appeal.
The county commissioners shall set a time and place for a hearing to be held not less than ten nor more than 20
working days after receipt of the request and shall notify the employee thereof. The hearing shall be conducted
informally, and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. All testimony shall be under oath. A vote of the majority
of the members of the county commissioners shall be final. The affected employee shall be notified in writing within
ten working days by the county manager of the final determination with respect to the disciplinary action.
In the event the county commissioners find that the disciplinary action was not well founded, the affected employee
shall be paid in full for such portion of time as the employee was unjustly suspended or removed. In the event that
the disciplinary action taken was removal, the employee affected shall be restored to the employee's former
position and pay status.
Any hearings or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted as exercises of judicial power. Such
hearings are merely voluntary compliances with forms of judicial procedure and do not in any way change the at-will
status of all county employment.
Cases where the disciplinary action involves dismissal.
In this type of adverse action, the employee should be notified by the department head/supervisor or elected
constitutional officer that the employee is being suspended with pay pending termination. The notification should
contain the reasons for the action and the effective date (which should be ten days from date of notification or
proposed action) and should contain a statement that the employee may request a hearing before the county
manager or elected constitutional officer. The employee must file a written request for a hearing within three days
of receiving the notice of proposed dismissal.
The county manager or elected constitutional officer should then schedule a hearing within five days of receiving
the request and so notify the employee. The employee should not be terminated before the employee receives a
hearing before the county manager or elected constitutional officer, if a hearing is requested. The employee may
bring witnesses and may have legal counsel. If witnesses are brought in, the county manager, or designee, or
elected constitutional officer may cross examine and otherwise question the witness. Under no circumstances,
however, should this hearing be considered or treated as an adversarial hearing. This hearing is designed solely to
obtain facts and does not alter the at-will status of the employee or create any property interest in the position of
employment with the county.
The county manager or elected constitutional officer may elect to dismiss, uphold or modify the proposed dismissal
and should notify the employee in writing within two days of the decision. Dismissal of the employee shall be
implemented following the county manager's or elected county officer's decision.
The notification should also include a statement to the employee which indicates that the employee may appeal the
county manager's decision, provided said employee responds in writing to the county commissioners within five
days of receipt of the county manager's notification. If the employee does not respond in five days, the employee
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
33/227
e.
f.
g.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
waives the possibility of further appeal. If an appeal is requested, the appointing authority should arrange for a
hearing and notify the employee of the date. The decision of an elected county official is not subject to appeal.
The county commissioners shall set a time and place for a hearing to be held not less than ten nor more than 20
working days after receipt of the request and shall notify the employee thereof. The hearing shall be conducted
informally, and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. All testimony shall be under oath. A majority vote of the
members of the county commissioners shall be final. The affected employee shall be notified in writing within ten
working days by the county manager of the final determination with respect to the disciplinary action.
In the event the county commissioners find that the disciplinary action was not well founded, the affected employee
shall be paid in full for such portion of time as said employee was unjustly removed and shall be restored to the
employee's former position and pay status.
Any hearings or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power. Such
hearings are merely voluntary compliance with forms of judicial procedure and do not in any way change the at-will
status of all county employment.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 7.09)
Secs. 2-224—2-254. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - GRIEVANCE AND APPEALS NOT INVOLVING ADVERSE ACTIONS
Sec. 2-255. - Purpose.
The purpose of the employee grievance procedure is to provide an orderly process for hearing the grievable claims of both regular and
working test employees. The object of the process is to reach a fair and equitable decision in a timely manner. The employee and supervisor
should make an effort to resolve any grievance informally before initiating a formal procedure.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.01)
Sec. 2-256. - Denition.
A grievance is a claim initiated by an employee alleging that the employee's employment or productivity has been adversely affected by:
Unfair treatment;
Unsafe or unhealthy working conditions;
Erroneous or capricious application of county policies and procedures; or
Unlawful discrimination.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.02)
Sec. 2-257. - Steps.
Normally, a grievance procedure will provide for a minimum of two steps. When practical, an attempt will be made to provide
at least two steps to a grievance. However, the organizational structure of the county may, as a practical matter, prevent all
grievances from receiving two steps. The following represents the order of the maximum grievance levels for employees:
Supervisor.
Department head.
County manager or constitutional officer.
In cases where a grievable claim is not resolved to the employee's satisfaction at the highest applicable available grievance
level and if it is an appealable matter (see sections 2-259 and 2-260), the employee may request another hearing. Such
additional hearing will be conducted by action of the county commissioners who may further determine the facts in the case.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
34/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
The county commissioners may then elect to modify the county manager's decision or may elect to let the original decision
stand. This decision should be final. There shall be no appeal to the county commission of any decision made by a
constitutional officer.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.03)
Sec. 2-258. - Grievance ling process.
An employee may file a written grievance with the employee's department head or supervisor within 15 days after the
occurrence of the event being grieved, or within 15 days after becoming aware of the event. The grievance statement must be
submitted to the department head/supervisor in writing, and it should state the specific claim and the specific relief desired.
Scheduling and notification. If the claim is determined to be grievable by department head or supervisor, a hearing by the
department head should be held within 20 days after the grievance is filed. The hearing officer (department head/supervisor)
should notify the employee of the decision in writing within 15 days after the initial decision and inform the employee that the
employee may request a further hearing before the county manager or the appropriate constitutional officer.
The employee must, within five days of notification of the decision of the first hearing officer (department head/supervisor),
request a grievance consultation with the county manager or constitutional officer.
If a second hearing is requested, the county manager or constitutional officer should schedule and notify the employee of the
date of the hearing, hold the hearing, and render a decision within ten days of the date of the hearing. If the decision is not in
favor of the employee (and if it is an appealable matter), the notification should include a statement that the employee may be
allowed to request a hearing before the county commissioners. (See section 2-260.)
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.04)
Sec. 2-259. - Grievance hearings.
First level (and second level, if available). Grievance hearings at these two levels are semi-formal in nature. The hearing officer
should listen to the employee's presentation and question the employee to obtain pertinent facts about the claim and the
situation relevant to the claim. The employee may self-represent, but may bring witnesses to the hearing to testify. Both the
employee and the hearing officer may question the witnesses. (These are information sessions and under no circumstances
should they be allowed to become adversarial in nature.)
Appeal hearing by the county commissioners. If a hearing before the county commissioners is held on appealable grievances,
both the employee and the county manager may represent themselves or may choose to have an attorney. The county
commissioners should compile evidence, prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law, and issue a decision. The decision
will be final.
Any hearing or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power. They are merely
voluntary compliance with forms of judicial process.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.05)
Sec. 2-260. - Non-grievable areas.
The following are not grievable:
Issues which are pending, or have been concluded by other administrative or judicial procedures.
Work assignments which do not result in a demotion.
Budget allocations and expenditures, and organizational structure, including the persons or number of persons assigned
to particular jobs or units.
The content or rating of a performance appraisal except when the employee can show that the employee has been
adversely affected by the appraisal.
The selection of an individual by the appointing authority or designee to fill a position through appointment, promotion,
or transfer except when the employee can show that the employee has been adversely affected because of unlawful
discrimination.
Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the appointing authority.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
35/227
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Internal security practices established by the appointing authority.
Decisions, policies, practices, resolutions, or ordinances made or passed by the governing authority or the appointing
authority which are not job or work related and which do not contradict these policies.
Disciplinary actions other than reprimands.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.06)
Sec. 2-261. - Appeals.
As stated in division 7 of this article, an employee may appeal an adverse action. Additionally, employees may appeal certain
other personnel actions that adversely affect an employee provided that the claim must be grieved before it is appealed. These
include:
Unlawful discrimination against an employee;
Unlawful or unjust coercion or reprisal; and
Other unlawful or unjust practices that adversely affect an employee.
Any appeals or hearings provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power. Such hearings are
merely voluntary compliances with forms of judicial procedures.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 8.07)
Secs. 2-262—2-285. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - HOLIDAYS
Sec. 2-286. - Holidays allowed.
The following are the official holidays that will be observed by eligible employees:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve
Christmas Day
Good Friday
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 9.01)
Sec. 2-287. - Observation of holidays.
Employees may be required to work during the above holidays.
Employees on a five-day, eight-hour schedule who are required to work on a designated holiday will receive 2½ times such
employee's regular pay or may elect to take an equivalent amount of time off at another time as determined by the employee
and the employee's supervisor. If a holiday falls on Saturday, it will generally be observed on the preceding Friday. If a holiday
falls on Sunday, it will be generally observed on the following Monday.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
36/227
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
A deputy sheriff, EMS employee or other employee on a seven-day, 24-hour schedule, who is required to work on a calendar holid
receive 2½ times such employee's regular pay or may elect to take an equivalent amount of time off at another time as determine
employee and the employee's supervisor.
Employees not working on a holiday will receive straight time for the holiday.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 9.02)
Secs. 2-288—2-307. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - WORK HOURS, OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME
Sec. 2-308. - Work hours.
Because of differences in job requirements, the required work hours or work period may vary from job to job and department to
department.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 10.01)
Sec. 2-309. - Overtime.
Overtime is time worked in excess of the regular work schedule for the position in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards
Act.
The county recognizes that occasionally, non-exempt employees may be required to work overtime in order to provide
essential services or in the conduct of routine operations. It is the county's intent that employees who are required to work
overtime are properly compensated for their efforts. Uncontrolled overtime can result in a substantial financial liability. The
county must ensure that an adequate management system is in place. All overtime must be pre-approved by the county
manager.
Exempt employees are appointed as official, executive, administrative or professional and are not eligible to receive overtime
compensation.
Non-exempt employees are not appointed as noted above. Work performed by a non-exempt employee in excess of 40 hours
per week shall be compensated by payment of overtime at the rate of 1½ times the regular base pay rate for the job
performed, or will be given compensatory time, one hour for every hour worked. The availability of department/agency
budgetary funds and the appointing authority or designee will determine how hours will be compensated. However, all
regulations as outlined by the Fair Labor Standards Act will be followed in the administration of overtime.
In order to be eligible for overtime payment, the department head/supervisor must provide the county manager, in writing,
the justification for overtime. In the case of an emergency, verbal justification will be sufficient. However, it must be done
before and not after the event and reduced to writing.
Overtime work commences when an employee reports on duty, ready for work and ends upon completion of the task or duty.
In calculating payment of overtime (time and one-half) actual hours worked and holidays shall be used. Payment of time and
one-half will be made for productive work time plus holiday hours in excess of 40 hours. Authorized absences, such as
annual/vacation leave, sick leave, etc., are considered non-productive hours and shall be paid at straight time.
Overtime work shall be distributed equally, commensurate with the competence to perform the work required. Unauthorized
working of overtime by non-exempt employees is considered a violation of policy, which may lead to discipline, up to and
including discharge.
Employees should schedule compensatory time hours off with their department head/supervisor who shall retain discretion to
schedule compensatory time off for employees.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, §§ 10.02, 10.03; Res. of 12-16-2010)
Sec. 2-310. - Time sheets.
Employees are required to keep accurate time sheets on forms provided by the appointing authority in accordance with FLSA
requirements.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
37/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
a.
b.
(1)
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 10.04)
Sec. 2-311. - Inclement weather/designated emergency policy.
County operations are always open for business during normal working hours. However, due to weather and or emergencies,
the county may be forced with a temporary closure or have limited operations. The county manager or, in the county
manager's absence, the chairperson of the board of commissioners, has the authority to make a decision regarding staffing
requirements during an emergency or weather event.
Employees will be notified by their immediate supervisor as to whether or not they're required to report to duty. The county
will also use the local media to notify employees if they are required to work.
Essential employees are those who are deemed critical to the operation of the county government during inclement weather
or any other designated emergency where their work is of such nature that if left unattended could result in danger or damage
to the property or person of a county resident or the traveling public.
When the courthouse is closed during normal work hours:
Nonessential employees are not required to report to work. Those non-exempt, essential employees who are
required to report to work shall be paid at 1½ times their regular rate for all hours worked during which time the
courthouse is closed.
Nonessential employees already at work when the courthouse closes early shall be paid for the remainder of their
work day at their regular rate of pay without having annual/vacation leave or leave without pay charged against
them.
Nonessential employees who choose to leave before an announcement is made that the courthouse is closed shall
be charged annual/vacation leave or leave without pay for the remainder of the day.
Essential employees who are non-exempt and are required to report to work shall be paid at 1½ times their regular
rate for all hours worked during which time the courthouse is closed.
Essential employees who do not report to work shall be charged annual/vacation leave or leave without pay for the
time period not worked.
When the courthouse is not closed:
Employees who fail to report to work without the normal prior arrangements with their supervisor in accordance
with the provisions of the county's personnel policies and procedures shall be charged with annual/vacation leave
or leave without pay.
Employees who report to work late, without appropriate justification, shall be charged annual/vacation leave or
leave without pay for the time period they were absent from work.
(Mo. of 4-21-2011(01))
Secs. 2-312—2-340. - Reserved.
DIVISION 11. - LEAVE
Sec. 2-341. - Types of leave.
The county recognizes five types of leave that are available to employees. They are: annual leave, sick leave, military leave, court leave,
and leave of absence.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.01)
Sec. 2-342. - Annual (vacation) leave.
Employees are encouraged to use their vacation time. No employee shall receive pay in lieu of vacation unless recommendation is made
by the department head and specific approval is given by the county manager.
Eligibility. All full-time employees in the personnel system shall be entitled to accrue annual leave. Permanent part-time
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
38/227
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
(4)
(5)
(1)
employees shall be entitled to leave in proportion to the number of hours worked. Temporary employees shall not be
eligible for annual leave.
Rate of leave accrual. Full-time and permanent part-time employees accrue annual (vacation) leave immediately upon
employment. Employees under temporary, substitute or emergency appointments, and seasonal employees will not be
granted annual leave under these policies. Vacation is accrued per the following schedule:
Years of Service Days Accrued
1 to 10 years 12 days (1 day per month)
10 years or more 15 days (1¼ days per month)
Request for leave. A request for leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor. Leave may be taken
only after approval by the appropriate department head so that the department can function without hiring additional
temporary help.
Maximum allowable accumulation. Unused vacation leave not to exceed 30 days may be carried into the next calendar
year.
Payment for unused leave. When an employee is separated from service, said employee shall be paid for all unused
annual leave.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.02)
Sec. 2-343. - Sick leave.
An employee may use accrued sick leave in the case of actual sickness or disability or for medical, dental or eye examination for which
arrangements cannot be made outside of working hours; when the employee is required to care for a sick or injured spouse, child or relative
who is domiciled in the employee's household. The employee shall report the illness prior to the employee's scheduled work time if possible.
If not, the employee shall see that the illness is reported within 30 minutes after the time the employee is scheduled to have reported for
work.
Eligibility. Those employees entitled to earn annual leave shall also be eligible to earn sick leave.
Rate of leave accrual. Full-time employees begin to accrue sick leave immediately upon employment at the rate of one
day per month.
Certification by physician. A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by a department head to
substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons:
Any period of absence consisting of three or more consecutive working days;
To support a request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on vacation leave;
Leave of any duration if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually provided the employee has been notified
or warned that a certificate will be required.
Maximum allowable accumulation. Sick leave may not be accumulated in excess of 90 days.
Forfeiture of sick leave. An employee who separates from the personnel system shall forfeit all unused sick leave; and no
employee shall be paid for unused sick leave.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.03)
Sec. 2-344. - Military leave.
Georgia law requires that paid leave be granted to members of the Reserve and National Guard under certain conditions.
Ordered duty. In compliance with O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, any employee ordered to military duty shall be placed on military
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
39/227
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
1.
2.
(2)
(3)
leave with pay for a period of time not exceeding a total of 18 days in any one calendar year and not exceeding 18 days in
any one continuous period of absence.
Declared emergency. According to O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, in the event the governor declares an emergency and orders any
employee to state active duty as a member of the National Guard, the employee shall receive pay for a period not
exceeding 30 days in any one calendar year and not exceeding 30 days in any one continuous period of active duty
service.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.04)
Sec. 2-345. - Jury leave.
An employee performing jury duty will be granted leave with pay. The employee will be permitted to retain all fees and allowances as well
as retaining full county pay provided they are in fact selected for jury duty and submit written documentation of such service. An employee
called for jury duty but not actually selected to serve on a jury or otherwise relieved from service during working hours will be expected to
return to work that day.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.05)
Sec. 2-346. - Leave of absence.
For military purposes. According to O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279, any voluntary member of the Reserve or National Guard shall be
entitled to be and shall be deemed to have a leave of absence while in attendance at any service school conducted by the
armed forces of the United States for a period up to six months during any four-year period.
For temporary disability and other reasons. A disabled employee may exhaust all accrued sick and annual leave. When paid
leave is exhausted, the employee may be placed on leave of absence, depending on the duration of the employee's disability
and the need to fill the position. A doctor's statement will be requested to determine the length of leave necessary. Maternity
and other temporarily disabling conditions associated with pregnancy will be treated as any other disability.
Benefits during leave of absence. A leave of absence prevents a break in service, but no benefits such as leave or time toward
retirement shall accrue during leave of absence.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.06)
Sec. 2-347. - Family and medical leave.
Federal law requires that employees be permitted to take unpaid leave to care for the illness of themselves or a close family member
under certain circumstances.
Eligibility. Employees of the county who have been employed for 12 months or more and who worked at least 1,250
hours during that time are entitled to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year in connection with:
The birth and first year care of a child;
The adoption or foster parent placement of a child;
The illness of an employee's spouse, child or parent with respect to a serious health condition, defined as one that
requires in patient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility, or which requires continuing
treatment by a health care provider; or
The employee's own illness. In the instance of birth, adoption, and/or foster placement, the entitlement for childcare ends:
After the child reaches the age of one year; or
12 months after the adoption or placement;
Entitlement for leave associated with the illness of a child occurs only where the child is under 18 years of age or
incapable of self-care due to mental or physical disability.
Amount of leave available. In cases where both spouses are employed by the county, the combined amount of leave for
child birth, adoption, and family illness is limited to 12 weeks.
Notification of anticipated leave. Except where circumstances are such that reasonable advance planning is not possible,
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
40/227
(4)
(5)
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
employees must provide the county manager at least 30 days' notice of the date when the leave is to begin. With respect
to foreseeable family or employee illness, the employee shall make a reasonable effort to schedule treatment, including
intermittent and reduced hour leave, so as not to disrupt unduly the operations of the county, subject to approval of the
employee's or family member's health care provider.
Benefits. Benefits accrued by the employee before leave is taken will not be altered by the employee's absence under this
policy. The employee is entitled to continuation of any health benefits, if such benefits are available, during the leave
period. Upon return, the employee is entitled to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent pay, benefits, and
conditions of employment.
Required certification.
The county requires that a request for leave be supported by a certification issued by the appropriate health care
provider of the eligible employee or of the son, daughter, spouse, or parent of the employee. The certification shall
include:
The date that the conditions commenced;
The duration;
The necessity for the employee's leave; and
The employee's inability to perform said employee's job functions.
The county reserves the right, at its own expense, to designate a second health care provider to provide a second
opinion. A third such option, should it be necessary, shall be binding. Upon the employee's return to work, the
county may require the employee to provide certification by the employee's health care provider that the employee
is able to resume work.
Special provisions. The county manager shall make, keep, and preserve records showing compliance with the Family and
Medical Leave Act.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.07)
Sec. 2-348. - Funeral leave.
Funeral leave of up to three working days shall be granted with pay for an employee absent from duty as a result of death in the
immediate family. For purposes of this section, immediate family shall mean a spouse, child, father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
brother, sister, grandmother, grandfather, or any relative who is domiciled in the employee's household.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 11.08)
Secs. 2-349—2-369. - Reserved.
DIVISION 12. - WORKER'S COMPENSATION PROCEDURES
Sec. 2-370. - Non-emergency occupational; accidents or disease.
The following provisions apply in cases of non-emergency occupational accidents or disease:
Must be reported to department head within 24 hours.
Department head investigates the accident and fills a report of injury or disease in full detail and immediately forwards
the report to the county manager's office.
If the medical attention of a physician is needed, the county manager's office shall make the appointment for employee
with the physician of employee's choice, selected from the three physicians appointed by the county for worker's
compensation treatment.
Employee is given form CT-555-Treatment Authorization to submit to the doctor's office at the time of the first treatment.
Employee returns CT-555-Treatment Authorization to the department immediately after treatment is received.
Department head forwards copies of the complete CT-555-Treatment Authorization to the county manager's office.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
41/227
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Department head should direct any problem or questions concerning the claim to the county manager's office for discussio
County manager's office must be informed of the date employee returns to work.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 12.01)
Sec. 2-371. - Emergency accidents.
If a work-related accident occurs that requires immediate emergency treatment, the supervisor should be notified immediately
and treatment received at the emergency room.
After treatment is received, the report of occupational injury or disease should be filled out in detail and submitted to the
county manager's office.
Subsequent treatment must be directed to one of the county worker's compensation insurance physicians unless the injury
requires specialized treatment and the emergency doctor refers the employee to a physician who specializes in the type of
injury incurred.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 12.02)
Note—If a non-emergency occupational disease or accident should occur at night or on weekends that requires medical attention before
regular office hours, procedures for emergency accidents should be followed.
Secs. 2-372—2-400. - Reserved.
DIVISION 13. - NON-DISCIPLINARY DEMOTIONS
Sec. 2-401. - Employee request to ll open positions; salary reduction in pay grade.
Employees may request that they be demoted to open positions at lower pay grades if they are qualified for the position. If such a
request is granted, the employee's salary will be reduced to an appropriate step within the pay grade of the new job.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XIII)
Secs. 2-402—2-430. - Reserved.
DIVISION 14. - TRANSFERS
Sec. 2-431. - Initiation and authority for transfers.
The appointing authority may initiate a transfer or an employee may request a transfer.
If a position is open at an equivalent pay grade, an employee may request transfer to that position. If the knowledge, skills and
abilities for that job are not the same as for the present job, the employee will be tested and interviewed for the new position
and will be on working test for the new job if transferred. The discretion to grant a transfer, if requested, rests with the
appointing authorities.
The appointing authority may transfer an employee to any position, at any pay grade, if the employee is qualified to do the
work and if the salary is not changed. A temporary transfer to a higher position may be made for up to 90 days without giving
a salary increase.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XIV)
Secs. 2-432—2-460. - Reserved.
DIVISION 15. - ABANDONMENT, REDUCTION IN FORCE, AND PROMOTIONS
Sec. 2-461. - Job abandonment.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
42/227
Employees who are absent from work for three or more consecutive days without having received leave approval or without having
called in to report the absence will be considered as having voluntarily abandoned their jobs. The separation will not be in good standing and
may affect the opportunities for re-employment.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XV)
Sec. 2-462. - Reduction in force.
A reduction in force may be necessary when a position or group of positions must be closed because of lack of work or lack of funds.
Employees who are separated in reduction-in-force may, at the discretion of the county manager, receive preference in rehiring should a
position for which they are qualified opens within that year.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XVI)
Sec. 2-463. - Promotional goals.
Promotional vacancies may be filled with applicants external to the county work force at the discretion of the appointing authority.
Normally, however, an attempt will be made to fill the vacancy from within if there is a qualified applicant already working with the county
and such action would not be in conflict with the county's anti-discrimination or unfair employment practices.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 17.01)
Sec. 2-464. - Eect of a promotion.
If a formal job classification plan is in effect, a promoted employee will be placed in the step in the new job class that the appointing
authority deems appropriate under the circumstances. If no formal plan is in effect, the employee will be paid a salary deemed appropriate
by the appointing authority.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 17.02)
Sec. 2-465. - Relationship of promotions to performance pay increases.
If the county, at the time of promotion, has a system for performance pay in effect, the promotion will not interfere with the employee's
consideration for a performance pay increase at the next scheduled performance evaluation date.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 17.03)
Sec. 2-466. - Eective date.
The effective date of any promotion, for compensation purposes, will be the first day of the next pay period following the date the
appointing authority approves the promotion.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 17.04)
Secs. 2-467—2-485. - Reserved.
DIVISION 16. - RESIGNATION
Sec. 2-486. - Resignation dened.
Resignation is the separation of any employee from the county through the submittal of a notice by an employee that he wishes to
resign.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 18.01)
Sec. 2-487. - Resignation in good standing.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
43/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
Employees are expected to provide a minimum of two weeks' notice in order to resign in good standing; provided however, department
heads are expected to provide a minimum of four weeks notice in order to resign in good standing. This may be in written form or given
verbally. Failure to provide such notice may adversely affect the employee's chances of re-employment with the county.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 18.02)
Sec. 2-488. - Refusal to accept resignation.
Under certain circumstances, the appointing authority may choose not to accept an employee's resignation and may instead choose to
dismiss the employee.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 18.03)
Secs. 2-489—2-514. - Reserved.
DIVISION 17. - EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 2-515. - In-service training.
The county is interested in promoting in-service training of employees for the purpose of improving the quality of personal service
rendered to the county and to assist employees to equip themselves for advancement in the county. The county manager may establish
standards for training programs, see that training is carried out as approved courses and programs, and develop supervisory and
management training and other types of training programs common to all departments.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 19.01)
Sec. 2-516. - Individual training.
To encourage the self improvement of each employee, the appointing authority may pay the following to encourage such training.
Factors considered in deciding whether the training will be offered may include the degree of job relatedness, cost, and the general value of
the training to the county.
Tuition.
Books, supplies, board and other necessary expenses, such as food, transportation, and incidentals.
If an employee fails to complete a course, the county shall be paid by the employee an amount equal to what was spent
by the county for such training. All such training must be job related. If the training is expensive, as determined by the
county manager, the employee may be required to sign a statement committing the employee to remain in the
employment of the county for two years after completion of training course. If employee leaves the county service prior
to the completion of the agreed two years of county service, repayment to the county will be on a prorated basis.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, § 19.02)
Secs. 2-517—2-540. - Reserved.
DIVISION 18. - UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT
Sec. 2-541. - County provided.
Uniforms for employees, as the appointing authority may authorize, may be furnished by the county. Such other equipment as
the appointing authority may deem essential to job performance may also be furnished. Upon termination of employment, an
employee is expected to return all such equipment and uniforms to the employee's supervisor. The county may withhold an
employee's final pay check until all equipment and uniforms are returned to such employee's supervisor.
Use of county-owned cellular telephones.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
44/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Cellular telephones are to be used for official business purposes only and when a safe, convenient, and less costly alternativ
For safety purposes, their use while operating a vehicle is strongly discouraged.
If a county-provided cellular telephone is used for personal business, the employee shall reimburse the county.
Department heads and the finance officer shall review the monthly invoices for services, air time, and toll charges.
Reimbursement by employees for personal use, as noted above, shall be remitted monthly. Reimbursement will be
credited to the department's telephone line item.
Department heads and supervisors shall carefully evaluate which employees are to be provided with cellular telephones.
This shall take into consideration the employee's supervisor. In turn, damage rendering the telephone inoperable, its
loss, or theft shall be reported to the vendor service provider as soon as possible to minimize liability for airtime and toll
call charges.
If the damage, loss or theft is due to negligence, the employee shall be held financially responsible.
Failure of cell phone users to comply with the provisions of this policy may result in corrective or disciplinary action up to
and including termination.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XX; Res. of 1-4-2011)
Secs. 2-542—2-560. - Reserved.
DIVISION 19. - MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES
Sec. 2-561. - Outside employment.
All county employees must receive permission from the appointing authority before accepting outside employment. No employee will be
allowed to accept outside employment which interferes with such employee's duties for the county.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXI)
Sec. 2-562. - Garnishments.
Employee indebtedness is a personal concern of the employee, but multiple garnishments of an employee's salary creates administrative
difficulties for the county. Any employee with three or more garnishments may be subject to disciplinary action.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXII)
Sec. 2-563. - Abuse and misuse of equipment and supplies.
Employees are entrusted with the use of public equipment and supplies. The abuse or misuse of county equipment and supplies can lead
to appropriate disciplinary action. Although there are other misuses or abuses, the use of county vehicles for personal use is considered to be
significant misuse or abuse.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXIII)
Sec. 2-564. - Conict of interest.
No employee should accept gifts or gratuities from anyone who might expect to receive return favors from the county. Neither shall an
employee have any financial interests in the profits of any contract service or other work performed by the county, nor shall the employee
personally profit directly or indirectly from any contract, purchase, sale, or service between the county and any person or company, nor shall
the employee personally or as an agent provide any surety, bail, or bond required by law or by the appointing authority.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXIV)
Sec. 2-565. - Political activities.
County employees may not use their position or county time for political purposes. Employees may express their political opinions
privately, and the county encourages employees to vote for candidates of their choice.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
45/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXV)
Sec. 2-566. - Security clearance.
In employment areas such as public safety and finance where the public has a compelling interest in the security of property and life,
applicants for employment, promotion, and transfer may be asked to supply personal information that would not be needed in other
employment areas.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXVI)
Sec. 2-567. - Employee incentive, recognition and rewards programs.
The board of commissioners may promote various incentive and rewards programs to recognize suggestions furthering economy and
efficiency, performance, attendance and years of service. These programs will offer new opportunities for staff development. The county
manager, with the approval of the board, will implement the programs.
(Mo. of 2-1-2011, art. XXVII)
Sec. 2-568. - Ocial copy.
The official copy of these personnel policies and procedures for the county will be attested and placed on file in the county clerk's office.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXVII; Mo. of 2-1-2011, art. XXVIII)
Sec. 2-569. - Employee copy.
Each employee will be expected to sign a statement that they:
Received a copy of these personnel procedures;
Reviewed the personnel procedures; and
Had an opportunity to ask questions about the personnel procedures.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, art. XXVIII)
Secs. 2-570—2-586. - Reserved.
DIVISION 20. - DEFINITIONS
Sec. 2-587. - Related terms.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adverse action means an action taken that results in a disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary demotion or disciplinary
dismissal.
Adverse effect means the results of an action or decision that is not an adverse action but which deprives the employee of income or the
opportunity to earn more income.
Appointing authority means the person who has, among other authorities, the authority to appoint and discharge all employees. The
county commissioners are the appointing authority for the county. However, the county commissioners have designated the county manager
to administer these policies. Constitutional officers shall be the appointing authority for their respective departments.
Constitutional officer means the clerk of the superior court of the county, the judge of the probate court of the county, the sheriff and the
tax commissioner.
County commission means the governing authority and financial authority of the county.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
46/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
Days, when used as a method of counting, means calendar days unless stated otherwise.
Department refers to the different departments under the county manager.
Designee means the person or persons to whom the appointing authority delegates certain authorities for the administration of their
offices. The county manager is hereby designated to administer these policies.
Handicapped means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, who
has a record of such an impairment, or who is regarded as having such an impairment.
Should denotes a condition that is desirable but not mandatory.
Unlawful discrimination means employment practices which are prohibited by state and federal laws and which include discrimination
because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, mental or physical handicap, and political affiliation.
Working test means a period of time during which a new employee or an employee who has been transferred or promoted to a higher
position is being tested on job capability and performance.
(Mo. of 12-4-2007, appendix)
Secs. 2-588—2-605. - Reserved.
DIVISION 21. - SAFETY POLICY
Sec. 2-606. - Statement of safety policy.
The safety of all county employees is of paramount interest and importance. The county commissioners and county manager
are dedicated to the effective control of accidents through enlightened employees.
Safety is a responsibility that we all must share, management and labor alike. The county is committed to provide a safe
working environment for all its employees. Each employee, in turn, is responsible for practicing good safety habits on the job
and for reporting hazardous working conditions or unsafe equipment. It is our goal to reduce accidental injuries and property
damage. To do this, we must have everyone's cooperation. It is in a condition of employment for all employees to conduct
their work in a safe and healthful manner.
The safety and loss control manual codified in this division has been developed to outline policies and procedures required to
ensure safe performance of county operations. Features of this manual were developed from basic safety philosophies used in
government and industry over the years. County employees are expected to follow this manual as a guideline for preventing
accidents and other losses that may result in many situations, conditions, or events that impact your work.
Purpose and scope. The purpose of this safety and loss control manual is to provide guidelines to assist employees and
supervisors in controlling all types of accidents. If these guidelines are followed, safe practices can be applied to any and
all departments, preventing accidents, eliminating human suffering, improving services rendered to the public and
reducing accident costs.
Safety and loss control philosophy.
Accidents can be controlled through good safety and loss control programs. The basic key to a successful program is
development of safe practices through the training for all employees.
Safety is defined as a condition of being safe from undergoing or causing hurt, injury, or loss. Loss control is more
comprehensive and includes proper training, control of accidents, and other situations, conditions, and events that
interfere with or interrupt job performance.
The county's safety and loss control program recognizes that the same factors apply to accident controls that apply
to providing a service to our citizens. Jobs that offer unnecessary danger to our employees must be discontinued
until the unsafe condition is eliminated and/or safe practices are provided.
(Mo. of 8-2-2011, art. I)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
47/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Sec. 2-607. - Responsibility for safety.
Each employee will be fully responsible for implementing the provisions of this manual and those individual departments as it pertains to
operations under their jurisdiction. Responsibilities outlined in this section are minimal. They shall in no way be construed to limit the
individual initiative to implement comprehensive procedures to prevent loss.
County manager. The county manager is responsible for the success of the safety and loss control program. Specific
responsibilities include the following:
Supporting the safety and loss control program and offering guidelines, training, and recognition for exceptional
safety-related performance and providing disciplinary action, if necessary.
Monitoring the ongoing safety and loss control programs and making changes as necessary to provide effective
safety policies and procedures.
Representing management in safety matters.
Authorizing creation of a county employee safety committee.
Safety coordinator. The county manager shall serve as the safety coordinator manager. Specific responsibilities include:
Serve as chairperson of the county employee safety committee.
Monitor safety meetings conducted at departmental levels and provide assistance for the total safety program. This
will include provision of materials and programs necessary for success in the department safety training.
Provide assistance and conduct investigations as appropriate for all types of accidents including employee injuries,
vehicle accidents and other liabilities.
Implement and monitor the county's safety incentive plan.
Ensure the county's eligibility for the ACCG/IRMA program for worker compensation and liability insurance
discounts, through training, inspections, and proper recordkeeping.
County employee safety committee. The overall responsibility of the committee is to establish, implement, and monitor
the safety and loss control program. This committee will be represented by various departments and will monitor the
effectiveness of ongoing safety programs. Committee members will be appointed by the county manager. Specific
responsibilities include:
Make recommendations to management as to county policy in the areas of safety and loss control.
Provide guidelines for county management to ensure a safe working environment for all employees, free from
safety and health hazards.
Recommend and organize effective safety programs including safety training.
Monitor and recommend methods to comply with state and federal regulations.
Recommend and take corrective action to prevent injuries to include personal protection equipment.
Monitor departmental safety activities.
Review and/or investigate accidents and special safety problems as necessary.
Department heads. Each department head has the full authority and total responsibility for maintaining safe and
healthful working conditions within the department head's jurisdiction. Personal exposure may vary depending on work
environment activities. Specific responsibilities include:
Development of appropriate safety rules and regulations designed to accomplish objectives of safety policies and
other issues unique to the respective department.
Making sure that all employees are trained for their assigned task before they are left to work alone.
Require that all accidents be promptly reported and thoroughly investigated. A recordkeeping system will be
necessary in each department.
Forwarding reports to the county manager for processing.
Note—The state patrol will be requested to service accidents involving all county vehicles. The sheriff's department will also service the
accident for administrative purposes.
Ensure that prompt corrective action is taken wherever hazards are recognized or unsafe acts are observed.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
48/227
f.
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(a)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(3)
a.
Make certain that all injured employees, regardless of how minor the injury, receive prompt medical treatment and rep
within 24 hours after occurrence to the county manager. Ensure that a supervisor investigates the circumstances causi
hours of the accident and submit a report on findings and recommendations to prevent accident recurrence within five
Employees. Employees are required, as a condition of employment, to exercise due care in the course of their work to
prevent injuries to themselves and fellow employees. Each employee must:
Comply with all county and department safety policies, safety rules and regulations.
Wear protective clothing and equipment as prescribed for the assigned job.
Comply with all safety instructions as issued by supervisors.
Report all accidents and injuries immediately to their supervisor, no matter how minor.
Be on the alert for unsafe conditions or unsafe acts. Report these acts and conditions to their supervisor so that
corrective action may be taken.
(Mo. of 8-2-2011, art. II)
Sec. 2-608. - Safety rules and regulations.
County safety rules and regulations. Employees of the county are expected to follow the safety rules and regulations
applicable to their own departments. These rules and regulations represent the minimum requirements, and may be
expounded on to ensure a safe working environment in each department. Employees shall use good judgment in dealing with
conditions not covered in these rules.
General.
Employees must report all accidents to their supervisor. Employees are expected to report any unsafe conditions to
their department heads.
Employees may not enter departments other than where they are scheduled to work.
Know the location of emergency exits. Evacuation plans should be posted in each department stating the path to
take in case of fire and other emergency. Evacuation plans shall be practiced a minimum of once a year.
Lift properly, get as close to the load as possible, keep the back straight, and lift with legs rather than the back. For
any item weighing over 50 pounds, at least two people should work together to lift the item.
Headphones are not permitted on the job. Exceptions are taken for communications equipment by authorized
employees.
Obey county no-smoking ordinances.
Conduct.
All employees are responsible for exercising due care in the course of their work to prevent injury to themselves,
their fellow workers, the general public and prevent damage to county and private property.
Before starting a job, each employee shall be trained to thoroughly understand the work being done, the
employee's responsibility on the job, and the safety hazards and the safety rules that apply.
Climbing or standing on machinery or equipment while in operation is strictly prohibited.
The use of alcohol or drugs will not be permitted on the job. Also, employees will not be permitted to work if any
evidence of alcohol or drugs is observed. This shall include any drug prescribed or purchased over-the-counter
which may interfere with work performance. The employee may be subject to drug/alcohol testing based on
reasonable suspicion, as set forth in the county's drug free policy.
Learn how to do assigned tasks the safest way possible. Never hesitate to ask questions about the assigned task.
Consult department heads for safety rules and procedures for the assigned tasks.
Observe recommended work procedures developed by the department head.
Running, pushing, shoving, fighting, or "horse play" is strictly prohibited.
Work at a safe speed, never hurry or take short cuts that may risk the safety of worker and/or co-workers.
Personal protection equipment.
Employees must wear personal protection clothing or equipment while performing certain types of jobs. Approved
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
49/227
b.
c.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
(6)
a.
safety eyeglasses, and/or goggles/face shields are required while grinding, polishing, buffing, chipping, and mowing.
Appropriate gloves are necessary depending on what is handled (as required in departmental safety rules or
designated by the department head). Hard hats are required where overhead exposures (falling objects) may be
present. Sheriff's department employees performing certain jobs require protective vests. Employees welding shall
be required to wear appropriate eye protection and proper clothing (gloves—arm and shoulder, etc.) as required by
department head.
Any individual working in traffic or close proximity to a street or road must wear reflective safety vests.
All personal protection equipment and clothing, if required for a job, shall be furnished by the county.
Equipment.
Employees must undergo proper training as verified by the department head before operating county equipment. A
record of the training should be kept by the department head and be placed in the employees' personnel file.
All portable electrical tools must be grounded, provided with ground fault interrupters or double insulated. Saws,
grinders and the like must have proper guards affixed to them. Do not remove any manufacturer installed guards.
The operation of equipment or machinery, which is not properly guarded, is strictly prohibited.
Ladders of proper length shall be used. Never stand on the top of the platform or second rung from the top of the
ladder. Always inspect ladders to see if they are safe to use. Never "walk" a ladder while standing on it. When using
a straight ladder, secure it at the top and bottom to prevent displacement.
Vehicle use.
Each employee shall produce to the county manager a seven-year motor vehicle driving record at the time of
employment.
Any employee whose work requires that the employee operate a county vehicle must hold a valid driver's license
required for the type of vehicle being operated. At the request of the county manager, the status of the employee's
driver's license may be checked by contacting the department of motor vehicle services. Any employee who does
not hold a valid driver's license will not be allowed to operate a county vehicle until such time as the driver's license
is obtained.
Any employee performing work which requires the operation of a county vehicle must notify their immediate
supervisor in those cases where their license is expired, suspended or revoked, if the license is required for the job.
If any employee fails to report such, the employee is subject to disciplinary action, including demotion or
termination, as stated in the county personnel policy and procedures.
Drivers must at all times, operate motor vehicles in a safe and courteous manner. county employees should conduct
themselves in a manner which promotes positive citizen opinion.
Employees shall operate county vehicles in accordance with all applicable state and local traffic laws.
Drivers shall ensure that they and all riders wear seatbelts at all times.
No alcohol, whether opened or unopened, will be allowed to be transported in any form in county vehicles. (Sole
exception is evidence for the sheriff's department.)
County vehicles shall not be operated by an employee who has consumed alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs.
Furthermore, county vehicles shall not be operated by an employee taking prescription drugs which could impair
the ability of the driver and cause them to operate the vehicle in an unsafe manner.
Except for repairs and maintenance, only licensed employees shall be authorized to operate county vehicles.
Prior to operating any county equipment, a safety/maintenance inspection should be completed by the operator. If
there is a default of any mechanical or safety feature that will prevent the equipment from operating in a safe
manner, it should be reported to the department head, and repaired before the equipment is released.
Use of cell phones, whether personal or county-owned, while operating a county owned vehicle is to be avoided.
Pull over to make or receive your call. In case of an emergency the use of a hands-free device is encouraged.
Lock out/tag out. During the repair or maintenance of any vehicle or any type of machinery from which an unexpected
release of hazardous (radiant or electrical) energy could injure the technician, the following steps will be taken:
Prior to beginning the repair or service of the machinery, turn off the power supply serving the machine. This could
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
50/227
b.
c.
(7)
a.
b.
c.
(8)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(9)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
(10)
a.
b.
(11)
a.
be done by turning a key to the off position or flipping a breaker.
To ensure that no one turns the power supply back on, place a tag on or beside the power source stating the
machine is down for maintenance.
In vehicles or heavy equipment, remove all keys and put them in a safe spot and hang the tag on the steering wheel
or controls, to notify anyone who gets into the vehicle or machine that it is not operational.
Housekeeping.
Keep oily waste and rags in enclosed metal cans.
Practice good housekeeping. Keep your work and walk areas in good order.
Keep electrical cords and wires out of walk areas.
Chemical handling.
Material safety data sheets (MSDS) on all chemicals, hazardous or non-hazardous should be kept in close proximity
to their storage area. Each employee working with or around a chemical should know where MSDS for the chemical
is located. Employees should immediately report to their department head if MSDS is missing.
Personal protection clothing and equipment should be worn while handling any type chemical. A minimum should
be eye protection/face shield, gloves and apron/protective suit. If the chemical dispenses a harmful gas, a respirator
should be worn.
All chemicals should be stored in their appropriate container.
All containers should be labeled of the contents within. If the chemical is placed in another container, that container
should also be labeled so the contents can be identified. If the container is to be used only once, then the container
should be discarded. No other chemical should be placed in a container labeled for another chemical. Use the MSDS
for a chemical to ensure the container is suitable to hold that chemical.
All personal protective clothing and equipment shall be furnished by the county.
Office safety. Offices are comparatively safe places in which to work, yet accidents occur. To make your working area safe,
observe the following:
Be careful of swivel chairs. Do not slump back in them without first testing your weight gradually.
Be sure to have a firm footing when you have to climb. Use a ladder. Do not use metal ladders around electrical
connections.
Walk; do not run in corridors or on stairs. Use handrails.
Do not stand and talk in front of closed doors that may open suddenly.
Read mail and other materials while sitting, not while walking around.
Watch for telephone cords, office machine wires, wastebaskets, etc., that may cause tripping.
Keep your file drawers, desk drawers, locker doors and the like closed when not in use. Open only one file drawer or
desk drawer at a time.
Check office furniture occasionally for sharp edges, splinters, loose casters or bolts.
Keep jewelry and clothing away from operating equipment.
Departmental safety rules.
Each department shall have safety rules that cover the duties for which the department is responsible. Any changes
to the departmental safety rules shall be approved by the department head. A copy of the departmental safety rules
and changes shall be forwarded to the county manager.
Departmental safety rules will be posted within the department and reviewed periodically in a safety meeting.
Enforcement and disciplinary action.
Enforcement. All employees are expected to follow all county safety rules and regulations. This applies to county
rules and department rules and regulations. Employees will be made aware of safety rules upon employment or
assigned to a work area or informed of any changes. This will be done verbally and in writing by the department
head. If any employee fails to abide by these rules and regulations, such employee will be subject to disciplinary
actions. Department heads, supervisors and crew leaders will enforce all safety rules and regulations.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
51/227
b.
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(3)
Disciplinary action. All disciplinary actions will be administered in accordance with the county personnel policies and pr
(Mo. of 8-2-2011, art. III)
Note—A copy of all departmental safety rules shall be forwarded to the county manager.
Secs. 2-609—2-634. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 2-635—2-656. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING POLICY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Local Government Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-657. - Introduction.
The policy set by the board of commissioners of the county (hereinafter referred to as "board") governs all purchases of goods and
services made by the board.
Purpose.
The purpose of this purchasing policy is to provide a systematic approach to the process of buying required goods
and services in proper quantities and qualities, from the right sources at the right times, and at fair prices.
The board will enforce purchasing laws, rules, and regulations as stated in the policy to protect the best interest of
the citizens of the county and maximize the use of citizen's tax dollars.
The policy will provide guidance and direction to all employees involved in the purchasing process.
Objectives.
To purchase goods and services at the lowest price, consistent with quality, performance, and delivery requirements
from capable suppliers meeting the county's needs.
To ensure adherence to all purchasing laws, regulations, and procedures.
To ensure that goods and equipment are in the hands of the using departments when and where they need them.
To deal fairly and equitably with all vendors wishing to do business with the county.
To maximize competition for all purchases.
Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Addenda means an addition or supplement to a document, issued by the county during the procurement process. This
document modifies or interprets the bidding documents by additions, deletions, clarifications or corrections.
Bid means a formal written and sealed offer of a price by a vendor to the county to furnish specific goods and/or services in
response to an invitation to bid.
Board means the board of commissioners of the county, a political subdivision of the state.
Change order means a modification, deletion or addition to an executed purchase order or contract by means of a formally
executed document signed by all parties.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
52/227
Construction means building, alteration, repair, demolition, improving, reconstructing, or any other improvements to real
property.
Contract means a written agreement, regardless of its name, for the purchase or disposal of goods, services or construction,
containing specific terms between two or more entities.
Cooperative contract purchasing means procurement of goods and services from a contract, which is made available to more
than one governmental entity.
County manager means the individual who is designated by the board of commissioners to fill this position and assume the
duties as established by ordinance for this position.
Department means the appropriate division or operation or member of the county requesting the purchase.
Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person or entity, including the board or one of its employees.
Emergency purchase means procurement that is made in response to a requirement for goods or services, when delay to
comply with all governing rules would cause an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare or other substantial loss to the
county.
Finance means the individual who serves as chief financial officer to the county.
Invitation to bid (ITB) means a written solicitation for bids used for the purchase of goods or services valued at or greater than
$25,000.00.
Invoice means an itemized list of goods shipped, specifying the price and quantity.
Necessary repairs and maintenance means repairs and maintenance to machinery and equipment that is essential to the daily
operations of the department.
Piggybacking means a procurement method allowing for inter-governmental cooperative purchasing where a public purchaser
enters into a contract with a vendor pursuant to a competitive bidding process and the county subsequently contracts with that
vendor based off the contract and competitive bidding process utilized by the public purchaser.
Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of any goods, services or construction for
public purposes.
Professional services means any architectural, engineering, landscape architectural and registered land surveying services.
Purchase order means an official county legal document used to encumber funds and authorize a purchase transaction with a
vendor, which delineates the responsibilities of both parties in the provision of and payment of goods and services required by the
county.
Quote/quotation means written offer to the county by a vendor for specific goods or services at a stated price.
Receipt of delivery means document, usually the invoice, signed by the receiver verifying that goods were received and
inspected.
Responsible vendor means an offeror who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the requirements of a contract or
purchase order, and the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance.
Request for proposal (RFP) means a competitive procurement method that allows the reviewer to consider factors other than
price including, but not limited to, supplier qualifications; experience; project approach; innovation; creativity; or value-added service,
when making the decision to award.
Request for quotation (RFQ) means a written request to solicit prices for specific goods or services.
Services mean labor, time, and/or effort provided by professionals or contractors.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
53/227
(4)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Single source purchase means when goods or services can be purchased from multiple sources, but, in order to meet certain
functional or performance requirements, there is only one economically feasible source for the purchase.
Small purchases means the procurement of goods or services less than $1,000.00.
Sole source purchase means the goods or services can be legally purchased from only one source.
Vendor means an actual or potential provider of goods or services.
Vendor list means a mailing list for vendors to receive bid opportunities based on class and items selected for the products or
services which can be provided to the county.
Final responsibility. The final responsibility for the carrying out of the provisions of this policy rests with the county board
of commissioners. The board may designate employees and/or officers to administer the various facets of this policy.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § I)
Sec. 2-658. - Purchasing overview.
Purchasing categories; threshold amounts for competitive purchases.
Competitive verbal quotes. Purchases at least $1,000.00, but less than $5,000.00. Written documentation is required to
substantiate verbal quotes.
Competitive written quotes. Purchases at least $5,000.00, but less than $25,000.00.
Formal competitive bids. Purchases equal to or greater than $25,000.00.
Purchase order requirements. A purchase order (PO) cannot be issued unless sufficient funds are available in the budget. The
following is the established county procedure for use of purchase orders:
A PO must be requested for all purchases from the finance officer.
The invoice with appropriate signatures shall be forwarded to finance immediately upon receipt of goods or completion
of service.
The PO will then be matched to the invoice, reviewed and processed for payment.
Role of county departments.
General role. The role of departments in the purchasing process is to work cooperatively with vendors, finance, and any
other departments of the board to procure the necessary goods and services in the most efficient manner to serve the
public of the county.
Specific role.
Review and become familiar with this purchasing policy.
Identify, as soon as possible, and sufficiently in advance, the needs for goods and services in their operations and
activities.
Respond to requests from finance for information on compliance, receipt of deliverables, invoicing issues,
expiration or renewal deadlines, and other requests necessary to facilitate contract management's ability to fulfill its
role as described above.
Use the proper forms and follow rules as described in this policy.
Utilize resources available through finance, including vendor lists to maximize competition among bids for goods
and services.
Determine that sufficient funds are available in their authorized budgets to pay for each item or service.
Inspect all goods and services received for accuracy and sign the invoice as a receipt of delivery. There shall also be
an appropriate approval signature authorizing payment to the vendor on all invoices.
Submit all agenda request related to necessary purchases in accordance with the policy set forth by the county
manager, providing ample time for proposed contracts to be drafted and/or reviewed by the county attorney.
Provide any requested additional backup information in a timely manner.
Attend training on procurement processes and policies as may be provided or recommended by contract
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
54/227
(3)
(d)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
management.
Responsibility. Department heads are responsible for the adherence to policy and proper authorization of all purchase
transactions initiated by their personnel.
Role of the chief financial officer.
General role. Serve as the accountant, auditor, custodian, comptroller, and chief financial officer to the board of
commissioners.
Specific role.
Issue purchase orders for approved purchases.
Return any requests that are incomplete or are inconsistent with the purchasing policy to the county manager.
Disburse funds for the purchase of goods and services.
Record all disbursements in the county's accounting records.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § II)
Sec. 2-659. - Competitive purchasing methods.
A contract or purchase cannot be divided or subdivided in order to circumvent the competitive purchasing methods set forth herein.
Competitive verbal quotations; purchases at least $1,000.00 but less than $5,000.00.
Departments shall encourage competition and seek the best value for the county by attempting to obtain at least
three verbal quotes for purchases less than $5,000.00. Written documentation is also required to substantiate
verbal quotes.
Upon review of quotations, the department shall select the lowest responsible vendor for the requested goods or
services. If the department selects a vendor other than the lowest responsible vendor, then the department must
provide a written explanation as to why the lowest responsible vendor was not selected, and shall obtain written
approval of the county manager prior to procuring the goods or services.
Competitive written quotes (purchases at least) $5,000.00.
All purchases equal to or greater than $5,000.00 and less than $25,000.00 shall require three written quotations.
The department must prepare a "request for quotation" form and fax, email, or mail to at least three vendors. All
information provided to each vendor must be identical to ensure fair competition.
Upon review of quotations, the department shall select the lowest responsible vendor for the requested goods or
services. If the department selects a vendor other than the lowest responsible vendor, then the department must
provide a written explanation as to why the lowest responsible vendor was not selected, and shall obtain written
approval of the county manager prior to procuring the goods or services.
If a department cannot obtain three quotations, the department head must provide a written explanation as to why
three quotations were not obtained.
Formal competitive bids; purchases equal to or greater than $25,000.00.
All purchases equal to or greater than $25,000.00 require formal and competitive bids, request for proposal (RFP) or
request for qualification (RFQ) as applicable.
All purchases must be advertised at least once in the legal organ at least two weeks or 14 calendar days prior to the
bid opening. The county's bid advertisement shall also be posted to the county's website.
Any construction project that is projected to cost more than $50,000.00 shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper
of general circulation in the county where the project is located at least two times prior to the bid or proposal
opening. The first advertisement must be at least four weeks before the bid or proposal opening. The second
advertisement must be at least two weeks after the first advertisement.
Bids or proposals shall be received and opened at the location, date, and time established in the bid or proposal
advertisement.
In addition to advertising, department heads shall utilize the established vendor list and send notice to other
applicable vendors.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
55/227
f.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(3)
If less than three responses are obtained, finance shall confirm that the request was made pursuant to the requiremen
Award of bid.
The board shall award the purchase or contract to the lowest and/or best value responsive bidder whose bid meets
the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bid. The award will be made to the bidder whose bid and
qualifications indicate that the award is in the best interest of the county.
When only one bid is received for the purchase of an item or group of items, the board shall review the bid in order
to determine the reasons why, if any, only one bid was received. The board may accept the only bid or it may
request that a second call for bids be issued. If the only bid is accepted, then the reasons why, if any, only one bid
was received shall be included in the minutes of the board.
If no complaint bid is received, the board may request a second call for bids be issued or may authorize the county
manager or designee to purchase by negotiation.
The board reserves the right to reject any and all bids. This shall be indicated in all advertising and bid invitations.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § III)
Sec. 2-660. - Alternative purchasing methods.
Cooperative contract purchases.
The applicable competitive procurement requirement set forth in section 2-659 is inapplicable if the purchase is procured
utilizing cooperative purchasing contracts. Cooperative contract purchasing from contracts issued by the state, ACCG,
general services administration, and U.S. communities government purchases alliance program is authorized when in the
best interest of the public. Additionally, the board may, in its sole discretion, recognize other cooperative contracts for
procurement.
The purchase requisition must reference the contract list, contract title, current contract number and contract expiration
date. Documentation from the contract referencing the item being purchased and the price must be submitted with the
requisition.
If the goods or services of equal quality can be purchased within the county boundaries at a rate less than the
cooperative contract price, the department head may utilize the local vendor.
Sole source/single source purchases.
If the required goods or services can only be procured legally and reasonable from one vendor, the vendor may be
determined a sole source.
A vendor may be determined a single source if the required goods or services can be purchased from multiple vendors,
but in order to meet certain functional or performance requirements, there is only one economically feasible source for
the purchase. Examples include, but are not limited to, compatibility, quality, conformity, service support and warranty.
The department head must complete the form titled, "sole source/single source purchase request." This form along with
a letter from the vendor stating that their business is a sole or single source provider of the specific goods or services
must be submitted for board, or board designee, for approval.
Piggybacking.
The county may purchase goods or services from a vendor, or contract with a vendor without following the procedures of
the applicable competitive purchasing method set forth herein when:
In the sole discretion of the board or county manager, the procurement of goods or services under the piggybacking
methods set forth herein serves the best interest of the public; and
The contract of the other governmental entity is, in the sole discretion of the board or board designee, let pursuant
to a competitive bidding process substantially similar to the applicable requirement provided herein.
The vendor shall submit to the department a written offer for the goods and/or services sought pursuant to the other
entity's contract.
Upon approval of the county manager, the department and finance shall review the bidding process used by the other
entity to ensure that it is substantially similar to the applicable procurement requirement set forth herein. When
applicable to determine compliance with the requirements of this section, the department should also review the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
56/227
(4)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(a)
(b)
invitation to bid or request for proposal, the number of responses submitted, the selected vendor's response, and the
resulting contract and/or purchase agreement.
The proposed contract between the county and vendor shall be substantially similar to the vendor's contract with the
other governmental entity to ensure the best interest of the public is met based on the sole discretion of the board or
board designee.
Emergency purchases.
A completed emergency purchase form certifying the conditions and circumstances requiring an emergency purchase
must be submitted to the county manager when a department head determines that an immediate danger to public
health, safety, or welfare or other substantial loss to the county requires emergency action. The county manager shall be
responsible for reviewing and making the determination if a purchase meets the definition of "emergency purchase"
under this policy.
In the event of any emergency, the requisition shall be labeled "exceptional purchase request" and shall be approved by
the county manager for an amount less than $50,000.00. The county manager will advise the board of the action taken at
the next board meeting.
If the emergency purchase is equal to or exceeds $50,000.00, the county manager shall submit the appropriate
information to the board for execution by the chair. If no meeting is scheduled prior to the necessary purchase, the
county manager may contact the chair who shall call a special meeting to address the emergency event. In the event
there is not time to schedule a special meeting, the chairman shall poll the board for approval.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § IV)
Sec. 2-661. - Purchases exempt from competitive or alternative methods.
Provisions as to advertising and bidding as set forth above shall not apply to the following classes of purchases or others as the board of
county commissioners may from time to time adopt:
Lease/rental of real property.
Purchase of patented or manufactured products offered for sale in non-competitive market or solely by a manufacturer's
authorized dealer.
Contracts involving policies of insurance or surety company bonds.
Purchases made through the state or against federal purchase contracts.
Contracts made with another political subdivision of the state, the federal government and any agency of the state or any
municipal authority.
Contracts involving the services of members of the medical or legal profession, architects, engineers, accountants or
other personal services involving professional expert advice.
Purchase of technical, non-personal services in connection with the assembly, installation or servicing (or the instruction
of personnel therein) of equipment of a highly technical or specialized nature.
Purchasing of items through the state contract.
Used equipment.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § V)
Sec. 2-662. - Contracts, change orders.
Purpose. Contracts may be used for purchases pursuant to any of the methods provided for herein or for purchases pursuant
to any exception provided herein. A contract is appropriate when engaging in construction or when purchasing goods and/or
services where a purchase order is not adequate to describe all the terms and conditions of the agreement. The contract
establishes the legal working relationship between two parties. It shall specify any applicable terms including, but not limited
to, payment, performance, maintenance, guaranties, termination, etc. Change orders are addenda to contracts which
authorize additional work or a modified scope of work.
Signing authority.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
57/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(c)
(1)
(2)
Contracts which are valued less than $25,000.00.
Contracts which are valued less than $25,000.00 may be executed by the county manager as designee for the board.
In this event, the department head, finance officer, county attorney, and county manager must sign the appropriate
request, each affirming that they have reviewed the contract and agree to the terms provided for therein.
Change orders may be executed by the county manager as designee for the board as long as the amended contract
value does not exceed $25,000.00. In this event, the project manager and county manager must sign the
appropriate request, each affirming that they have reviewed the contract and agree to the terms provided for
therein. If there are any contract language changes, the county attorney must also approve.
In the event the change order will result in the value of the contract exceeding $25,000.00, then the change order
must be signed by the board.
Contracts which are valued at $50,000.00 or more.
Contracts which are valued at $50,000.00 or more must be executed by the board.
Change orders up to ten percent of the original contract cost or up to $50,000.00 whichever is less, may be executed
by the county manager as designee for the board. In this event, the project manager, finance officer and county
manager must sign the appropriate request, each affirming that they have reviewed the contract and agree to the
terms provided for therein. If there are any contract language changes, the county attorney must also approve.
Change orders greater than ten percent of the original contract cost must be approved by the board.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § VI)
Sec. 2-663. - Local vendor preference.
Scope. This section shall apply to all county purchases less than $25,000.00. For purchases less than $1,000.00, the member of
county staff making the purchase shall attempt to procure the goods or service from a local vendor when reasonable.
Local vendor.
A vendor shall receive preference as set forth in this policy when the vendor submits, along with its quote or bid;
information satisfactory to determine it meets two out of the three criteria set forth below, or when the board of
commissioners determines an award to a particular vendor will benefit the local economy.
Eligibility criteria for local preference (two of the three must be met):
The vendor has its principal place of business located in the county;
The business supports a local employee base in the county;
The owner of the vendor has such owner's primary residence located in the county.
Award.
Vendors meeting two of the three eligibility requirements shall have preference to purchases when its quote, or proposal,
is equal to or less than that submitted by a non-local vendor.
In the event any local vendor's proposal is within five percent of the lowest quotation or proposal received, the local
vendors within five percent of the low bidder and the low bidder shall have the opportunity to resubmit quotations or
proposals. These one time final re-submittals shall be provided to the county within five days of the vendors being
notified of the opportunity to re-submit. The county shall award the purchase to the lowest bidder, in the event there is
more than one lowest bidder and one of those low bidders is local, the purchase shall be awarded to the local vendor. It
is the intent that the local preference has no impact on the county's budget and not increase expenditures.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § VII)
Sec. 2-664. - Ineligible vendors.
Any person, firm, or corporation in arrears to the county for taxes, or otherwise, will not be qualified to bid on any purchase until their
lien to the county has been cleared. No purchase order will be approved for such vendors.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § VIII)
Sec. 2-665. - Interest of county ocials in expenditure of public funds.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
58/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
No official of the county can be involved directly or indirectly in any transaction with, sale to, work for, or contract with the county or any
department of government or service involving expenditure of public funds. The county shall not use a vendor who is a member of the
immediate family of a county commissioner, county attorney, county manager, a department head, or finance officer. The county shall not
use a vendor for services in an operating department who is a member of the immediate family of an employee of that operating
department.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § IX)
Sec. 2-666. - Procurement for personal use prohibited.
The facilities and services of the county will not be used to procure or receive any item or service for the personal use of employees.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § X)
Sec. 2-667. - Gifts and gratuities.
An employee of the county may not accept any personal gifts or favors of value or elaborate entertainment from any person or
firm with whom the county is presently doing or has previously done business with or from anyone desiring to establish
business relations with the county.
Normal courtesies or items distributed as part of an advertising program may be accepted when there is obviously no intent to
abating special consideration for the donor. Return of gifts or gratuities or refusal to accept them should be done promptly
and tactfully.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § XI)
Sec. 2-668. - Service and maintenance contracts.
All service and maintenance contracts, regardless of value, which are awarded by the county, will be reviewed by the finance officer and
the concerned department head at least annually. The evaluation shall be on the basis of established criteria.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § XII)
Sec. 2-669. - Violations.
Any officer, agent, or employee of the county, or person doing business with the county who knowingly violates the provisions
of this article shall be personally liable for any losses incurred by the county.
Any officer or employee who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to discharge or removal from office for
cause or such lesser disciplinary action as may be appropriate in accordance with the county's policies and procedures.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(01), § XIII)
Secs. 2-670—2-698. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - INVESTMENT POLICY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Local Government Investment Pool Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-699. - Scope.
This investment policy applies to all funds under the county's control.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § I)
Sec. 2-700. - Objectives.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
59/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
The following investment objectives shall be met with this policy:
Safeguarding of assets. Preservation of principal shall always be the foremost objective in any investment transaction
involving the county funds. Those investing funds on the county's behalf must first ensure that capital losses are avoided
by limiting credit and interest risk. Credit risk is loss due to the failure of the security issues or backer. Interest risk is the
risk that market value portfolios will fall due to an increase in general interest rates.
Cash liquidity. The second objective shall be the maintenance of sufficient liquidity within the investment portfolio. The
county's investment portfolio shall be structured such that securities mature at the time when cash is needed to meet
anticipated demand (static liquidity). Additionally, since all possible demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should
maintain some securities with active secondary or resale markets (dynamic liquidity).
Return on investment (ROI). The third objective shall be the realization of competitive investment rates, relative to the risk
being assumed. However, yield on the county's investment portfolio is of second importance to the safety and liquidity
objectives described above.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § II)
Sec. 2-701. - Delegation of authority.
The daily management of the investment program is the responsibility of the county manager. All changes to the county's
investment program shall be approved by the board of commissioners. Responsibility for the daily investment activities can be
assigned by the county manager. The county manager may designate an employee or employees to assist with the
management and implementation of the county's investment program. Responsibilities to fulfill this authority include: opening
accounts with banks, brokers, and dealers; arranging for the safekeeping of securities; and executing necessary documents.
A system of internal controls over investments is established and approved by the county's independent auditors. They are
designed to prevent losses of public funds arising from fraud, error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes
in financial markets, and/or imprudent action by staff and county officials. No person may engage in an investment transaction
except as provided in this policy.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § III)
Sec. 2-702. - Authorized investments.
All investments are required to be in compliance with chapter 83 of title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia, which establishes guidelines
for local government investment procedures. The county may invest funds in the following ways, consistent with Georgia local government
investment recommendations:
Certificates of deposit (CDs) issued by banks insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation (FDIC). Deposits in
excess of FDIC coverage must be collateralized by securities with a market value equal to at least 110 percent of the
deposit. Only those securities described in O.C.G.A. § 50-17-59 can be pledged as collateral;
Certificates of deposit (CDs) issued by savings and loans associations issued by the federal savings and loan insurance
corporation (FSLIC). Deposits in excess of the FSLIC coverage must be collateralized by securities equal to at least 110
percent of the deposit. Only those securities described in O.C.G.A. § 50-17-59 can be pledged as collateral;
Obligations issued by the United States government;
Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency;
Obligations of any corporation of the United States government;
Obligations of the state of Georgia or of other states;
Obligations of other political subdivisions of the state;
The local government investment pool of the state managed by the department of administrative services, fiscal division;
Repurchase agreements (REPOs) issued by commercial banks insured by the FDIC and collateralized by securities
described in O.C.G.A. § 50-17-59 with a market value of at least 103 percent of the repurchase agreements' maturity
value;
Repurchase agreements (REPOs) issued by primary dealers supervised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
60/227
(11)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
collateralized by securities described in O.C.G.A. § 50-17-59 with a market value of at least 103 percent of the repurchase
agreements' maturity value; and
Prime banker's acceptances.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § IV)
Sec. 2-703. - Prudence.
The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the "prudent person' standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio. Under the "prudent person" standard, investments shall be made with judgment and
care, discretion and intelligence, not for speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety of the capital as well
as the probable revenue to be gained.
The county manager and all designees acting in accordance with written procedures; and this investment policy; and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price
changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely manner and appropriate action is taken to control
adverse development.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § V)
Sec. 2-704. - Diversication.
Macon county agrees with the premise that diversification is an important component of portfolio security. Therefore, the county shall
endeavor to maintain an adequate level of diversification among its investments. The county shall not be over invested in any one type of
instrument or financial institution. No more than 33 percent of the total investment portfolio shall be placed with a single issuer.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § VI)
Sec. 2-705. - Maturities.
To achieve the aforementioned objective of adequate liquidity within the county's portfolio, the county shall attempt to match investment
maturities with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the maximum maturity of any instrument in the
portfolio may not exceed two years from the date of acquisition by the county. In order to preserve liquidity and to lessen market risk, not
more than 25 percent of the total portfolio may mature more than two years beyond the date of calculation. Not more than 25 percent of the
total portfolio may mature more than one year beyond the date of calculation, not inclusive of the two-year rule. The maturity of nonnegotiable time deposits may not exceed one year.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § VII)
Sec. 2-706. - Safekeeping and custody.
All investment securities purchased by the county should be delivered against payment and held in a safekeeping account by the trust
department of a bank insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation. The county manager, or designee, shall be responsible for the
selection of a financial institution for this purpose, as well as the execution of a written safekeeping agreement with the trustee.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § VII)
Sec. 2-707. - Ethics and conicts of interest.
Officers and employees involved in the investment process will refrain from personal business activity that would conflict with
proper execution of the investment program, or which would impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and
investment officials will disclose to the county manager any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct
business with the county, and they will further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that would be related
to the performance of the county's portfolio.
Employees and investment officials will subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the county, particularly
with regard to the time of purchase and sales.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § IX)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
61/227
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Sec. 2-708. - Relationships with banks and brokers.
The county will select depositories through the county's banking services procurement process, including formal requests for proposals
issued as needed. To the extent possible, preference will be given to depositories located within the county. The creditworthiness of the
institutions should be a fundamental consideration.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § X)
Sec. 2-709. - Report on deposits and investments.
Quarterly investment reports will be submitted to the county manager. Reports should include the following: an average daily balance of
investment (if applicable), or principal value, in each investment category; a current portfolio yield for each investment type and for the
portfolio as a whole; and a percent of available funds invested. The report shall also provide a list of investments as of the last day of the
quarter. This in turn will be provided to the county commission.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § XI)
Sec. 2-710. - Performance evaluation.
The county manager, or designees, will seek to achieve a market average rate of return on the county's portfolio. Given the special safety
and liquidity needs of the county, the basis used to determine whether market yields are being achieved shall be the six-month treasury bill.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(02), § XII)
Secs. 2-711—2-733. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - FIXED ASSETS
Sec. 2-734. - Fixed asset criteria.
A fixed asset is defined as a financial resource meeting all of the following criteria:
It is tangible in nature.
It has a useful life of greater than one year.
It is not a repair part or supply item.
It has a value equal to, or greater than, the capitalization threshold of $5,000.00.
Exceptions.
All land shall be recorded.
Infrastructure shall be capitalized using the following:
New road construction shall be capitalized when the unit cost of a new or replacement road at a specific location
exceeds $150,000.00. Unit cost is defined as the cost to grade, drain, base and pave one mile of two-lane roadway.
Resurface road shall be capitalized when the unit cost of repaving exceeds $50,000.00. Unit cost is defined as the
cost to repave one mile of two-lane roadway.
Bridges/culverts shall be capitalized when the unit cost is $60,000.00 or more for a specific location.
Keeping an accurate record of the county's fixed assets is important for a myriad of reasons. Some of the most important
reasons that the county needs to keep a good record of fixed assets are for:
Financial statement information;
Insurable values;
Control and accountability;
Maintenance scheduling and cost analysis; for estimating and accounting for depreciation;
Preparation of capital and operating budgets; and
Debt management.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
62/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § A)
Sec. 2-735. - General policy.
Each department head is ultimately responsible for the proper recording, acquisition, transfer, and disposal of all assets within their
department. County property may not be acquired, transferred, or disposed of without first providing proper documentation. A fixed asset
information form must accompany each step.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(1))
Sec. 2-736. - Recording of xed assets.
Unless otherwise approved by the county manager, all recordable fixed assets must be recorded within 30 calendar days after
receipt and acceptance of the asset.
A fixed asset form must be attached to the purchase order before submitting a payment request.
Assets will be capitalized at acquisition cost, including expenses incurred in preparing the asset for use.
Donated assets shall be recorded at fair market value as determined by the department head. Fair market value may be
defined as, but is not limited to, an average of documented prices for equivalent items from three separate vendors.
The county will recognize acquisition costs based on individual unit prices. Assets should not be grouped.
For equipment purchases, title is considered to pass at the date the equipment is received. Similarly, for donated assets, title is
considered to pass when the asset is available for the department's use and when it assumes responsibility for maintaining
the asset.
Constructed assets are transferred from the construction in progress account to the related building, improvements other
than buildings, or equipment accounts when they become operational. Constructed buildings, for example, are assumed to be
operational when an authorization to occupy the building is issued, regardless of whether or not final payments have been
made on all the construction contracts.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(2))
Sec. 2-737. - Acquisition of xed assets.
There are various methods by which assets can be acquired. The asset acquisition method determines the basis for valuing the asset.
Fixed assets may be acquired in the following ways:
New purchases.
Donations.
Transfers from other departments.
County surplus.
Internal/external construction.
Lease purchases.
Trade-in.
Forfeiture or condemnation.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(3))
Sec. 2-738. - Lease purchases.
Assets may be lease-purchased through installment purchases (an agreement in which title passes to the department) or
through lease financing arrangements (an agreement which title may or may not pass).
Departments considering a lease purchase for greater than $10,000.00 and other than from an established, county-approved
contract, must consult with the county manager.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(4))
Sec. 2-739. - Transfer of xed assets.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
63/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
An asset transfer between departments usually represents a form of sale of an item by one department to another and may be treated
as a new purchase. A transfer between related departments under the same control (sheriff and jail, for example) may, if desired, be treated
as a transfer rather than sale. This asset is recorded under the new department with original acquired date and funding amount.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(5))
Sec. 2-740. - Sale of xed assets.
Sale of fixed assets by a department must be to the highest, responsible bidder and must be conducted by sealed bid or auction. The sale
must be publicized in accordance with county and state law.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(6))
Sec. 2-741. - Disposal of xed assets.
When an asset is disposed of, its value is removed from the financial balances reported and from inventory reports. However,
the asset record, including disposal information, remains on the master file for three years, in the county clerk's office, after
which time it is purged from the system according to general accepted accounting principles. This preserves an audit trail for
disposed items, and facilitates departmental comparisons between actual or historical useful life information with useful life
guidelines. Such comparisons permit a more precise definition of an asset's useful life than those provided by the internal
revenue service (IRS) or other guidelines initially used.
A disposal action is appropriate only when certain conditions occur resulting in an asset no longer being in the possession of
the agency. Assets no longer in use, which remain in the possession of the department, are considered surplus property and
not a disposal.
Fixed assets may be disposed of in any one of six ways:
Sale or trade-in;
Abandonment/retirement;
Lost or stolen;
Transfer;
Cannibalization (taking parts and employing them for like uses within the department, such as is often the practice in
computer or vehicle maintenance);
Casualty loss.
Only when the asset is no longer in possession of the department, due to one of the six reasons listed above, is disposal action
appropriate.
Assets are "abandoned" or "retired" when there is no longer any use for them in the department; they are of no use to any
other county department; they cannot be repaired, transferred, cannibalized, sold, or traded-in. Thus meaning that, there is no
safe and appropriate use for the abandoned goods to the county or for others.
Stolen items must be reported to sheriff's office and a report filed. A copy of this report must accompany the disposal record.
Casualty losses must be documented within 24 hours of loss and reported to the finance officer immediately for follow-up with
the county's insurance carrier.
Cannibalized items are considered surplus and are disposed of by noting cannibalization on the disposal record. Ideally, this
method will allow departments to look at cannibalized items on the disposal report and assess what surplus parts may be
available. Departments will send documentation of items cannibalized to the county clerk's office, and all remaining costs and
accumulated depreciation will be removed from appropriate asset accounts in the general fixed asset fund.
All assets no longer in the possession of the department, due to one of these six qualifying conditions and after submission of
all appropriate documentation to the county clerk's office, will be removed from the master departmental asset file and
considered disposed.
Department heads are responsible for reviewing disposal reports, evaluating causes and trends leading to disposals, and
implementing procedures to more effectively manage and control disposals when the dispositions represent problems,
inefficiencies, and/or the incurrence of unnecessary cost.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
64/227
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(7))
Sec. 2-742. - Physical inventory.
An annual physical inventory of all fixed assets will be performed at the direction of the county manager.
(Ord. of 1-20-2011(01), § B(8))
Secs. 2-743—2-767. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - FUND BALANCE POLICY
Sec. 2-768. - Denition.
Fund balance, as defined by the Governmental Accounting, Auditing and Financial Reporting of the Government Finance Officers
Association, is "the difference between fund assets and fund liabilities of governmental and similar trust funds." There are two types of fund
balance: reserved and unreserved. Additionally, there are two subdivisions of unreserved fund balance: designated and undesignated. These
will be discussed in further detail as follows:
Reservations of fund balance are made for legal purposes such as reserves for debt service, long-term receivables,
employees' retirement, and others. Reservations of fund balance represent financial resources which are not available
for expenditure. This is because either the funds have been obligated to meet specific legal obligations (debt service or
retirement obligations) or because the funds will not be received in a timely enough fashion to be available for the
subsequent year's appropriation (long-term receivables.)
Unreserved fund balance attempts to measure how much will be left over at the end of the current fiscal year which can
be used for the subsequent fiscal year's budget. There are financial resources, which are available for appropriation.
Unreserved fund balance is further broken-down into two components: designated and undesignated.
Designations of fund balance reflect the board's intended use of resources and should reflect actual plans approved
by the governing body. Designations of fund balance are collectively reported on the face of the balance sheet and
rarely itemized in the notes to the financial statements. Designated fund balance may or may not be appropriated
for expenditure in the subsequent year depending on the timing of the project/item for which they were designated.
Undesignated fund balance represents financial resources which are not obligated (reserved) or specifically
designated and which are available as source of funds for general appropriation.
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § A)
Sec. 2-769. - Purpose.
Adoption of a fund balance policy is appropriate in order to secure and maintain investment-grade credit ratings; meet
seasonal shortfalls in cash flow; and reduce susceptibility to emergency or unanticipated expenditures and/or revenue
shortfalls.
This fund balance policy defines:
How designations of fund balance will be made;
The method of budgeting the amount of estimated unreserved, undesignated fund balance available for appropriation
during the annual budget process (prior to the actual, audited fund balance being known); and
What actions may need to be taken if the actual fund balance is significantly different than the budgeted fund balance.
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § B)
Sec. 2-770. - Policy.
Designations of fund balance. Designations of unreserved fund balance may be made for such purposes including, but not
limited to, major maintenance and repair projects, meeting future obligations resulting from a natural disaster, meeting
insurance deductibles and for setting aside amounts for specific projects not included in the general appropriation of
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
65/227
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
undesignated fund balance.
Appropriation of undesignated fund balance. The actual amount of undesignated fund balance is not known until the
completion of the annual audit. However, an estimate of undesignated fund balance (also called estimated beginning fund
balance) shall be made during the annual budget process.
Estimated beginning fund balance. In order to achieve the most accurate estimate possible, the county manager shall project
both sources of funds (revenues, prior years fund balances carried forward and other financing sources) and uses of funds
(operating and non-operating expenditures), including accruals, for each department in each governmental fund through June
30 of the then current fiscal year. These projections will be shown in budget documents for each fund. The difference between
the estimate actual sources of funds and estimated actual uses of funds, is the calculated estimated beginning fund balance
for the subsequent fiscal year. If planned for use in the subsequent fiscal year, designated fund balance may be included in the
estimated beginning fund balance.
Estimated ending fund balance. For the year being budgeted, a calculation of ending fund balance shall also be made. This
calculation shall be the difference between the budgeted sources of funds and the budgeted uses of funds as described above.
Since the uses of funds are restricted in all other fund types there is no limit to the amount of ending fund balance unless the
project is completed and the funds should be closed. In this situation, a residual equity transfer will be made to zero-out any
remaining fund balance. If, after the annual audit, the actual unreserved, undesignated fund balance is greater than 25 percent
of operating expenditures in the general fund, the excess may be used in one or a combination of the following ways:
Left in the general fund to earn interest and roll forward into the subsequent year's beginning fund balance;
Appropriated by the board for one-time expenditures that do not increase recurring operating costs;
Used to establish or increase a legitimate reservation or designation of fund balance;
Appropriated for start-up expenditures of new programs undertaken at mid-year, provided that such action is considered
in the context of board-approved multiyear projections of revenues and expenditures;
Designated to establish a discretionary stabilization fund, which may be used at the board's discretion to address
temporary cash flow shortages, emergencies, unanticipated economic downturns and one-time opportunities.
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § C)
Secs. 2-771—2-785. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 2-786—2-796. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ROAD NAMING COMMITTEE
Sec. 2-797. - Composition; duties.
A committee composed of the county manager; the county EMA director; sheriff of the county; the county planning and zoning/building
inspection department; U.S. postmaster; representative of the county tax department; director of the county EMS; and director of the county
public works department is hereby appointed to review, rationalize and recommend to the board of commissioners of the county, as
appropriate, the following:
Changes in the names or new names for roads and other public and non-dedicated ways of the county, so as to avoid
duplications and/or confusing similarities;
Names or designations for roads and other public and non-dedicated ways in the unincorporated areas of the county, in
and upon any subdivisions or other platted lands, which may be proposed in the future. Names should not duplicate or
have confusing similarities with other names. All such new developments shall be required to obtain the approval and
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
66/227
recommendation of this committee before going before the planning commission for final approval. The board of
commissioners of the county may approve names prior to planning commission approval on appeal from the road
naming committee.
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § I, 4-3-2007)
Sec. 2-798. - Oces held at will of board of commissioners.
The members of said committee shall hold office at the will of the board of commissioners of the county.
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § II, 4-3-2007)
Sec. 2-799. - Compensation.
The members of said committee shall serve without additional compensation.
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § III, 4-3-2007)
Sec. 2-800. - Changes that aect more than ve owners.
The committee shall not recommend changes in names of roads or streets in the event that more than five residential or property
owners will be affected by said name change.
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § IV, 4-3-2007)
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to
manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine.
Church means any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship.
Employee means any person who performs any service for a licensee at the business location of the licensee whether for compensation
or otherwise when the services performed directly relate to the sale of wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits (liquor).
Malt beverages or beer means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or
any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and
including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverages or beer" does not include sake, known
as Japanese rice wine.
Package store license means a license issued to a retail dealer for the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits (liquor) in
sealed containers, for consumption off the premises, generally known as sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits (liquor) "to go."
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
67/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Premises means the building or structure for which the license is granted together with the lands reasonably surrounding said building
or structure and includes any and all parts of said building or structure which shall be covered by one common roof or roofline regardless of
whether said part or parts are separated by permanent or temporary walls or partitions.
Private club means a non-profit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, which has been in existence for a period
of at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license hereunder which has at least 75 members regularly paying dues,
organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profit purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with
suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment, and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing
and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, directly or
indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt
beverages beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed to him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out
of the general revenue of the club. For the purpose of this chapter, tips which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be
considered as spirits hereunder.
Private residence means the house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and does not
include a mobile home, a boardinghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers, or any residence which has been unoccupied for
a period of six consecutive months immediately preceding the filing of an application.
Retail dealer or retailer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for
consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retail dealer" or
"retailer" means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale.
School means only such state, county, city, church or other school that teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of
this state and does not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine,
dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. School grounds include the entire campus as defined by state law.
Wine or vinous liquors mean fermented beverages made from grapes, berries and other fruits, including fortified wines, provided the
same shall not contain more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, but the term "wine" or "vinous liquors" does not include cooking wine mixed
with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, pt. 1)
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties.
Upon conviction in the county magistrate court or superior court of any violation of any penal provision of this chapter, unless
otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as set by the judge as allowed by the Charter of the county and the laws of the
state.
Any license, issued under this chapter, may be suspended for a period of time now exceeding six months or may be revoked
by the commissioners by reason of any disturbance, acts of disorderly conduct, violence, gambling or by reason of any
conviction for violation of this chapter having occurred in the establishment or on the premises thereof; provided that when
the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to any person, firm or
corporation at that location for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation.
All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this
chapter by an employee thereof, provided the court may only impose a just fine under this subsection.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be treated as a misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment as
described by the general penalties in section 1-15. The sentence shall be set by the judge of the magistrate court of the county
or the judge of the superior court of the county.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, pt. 8)
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - APPLICANTS AND APPLICATIONS
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
68/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 6-23. - License required.
No malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits (liquor) shall be sold legally in the county, outside the limits of incorporated municipalities,
except under a license granted by the commission as herein provided.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.1)
Sec. 6-24. - Applications to be made in person.
All applications for licenses for the sale of malt beverages, and/or distilled spirits (liquor) shall be filed in person by the applicant at the
office of the commissioners, and shall consist of a completed form furnished for application purposes by said commissioners and fully in
accordance with the criteria hereinafter set out.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.2)
Sec. 6-25. - Fingerprints to be furnished.
As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license hereunder, the applicant shall furnish to the sheriff of the county a complete
set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded by said sheriff to the division of investigation of the state which shall search the
files of the state crime information center for a period of at least two years immediately preceding the date of such application
for any instance of criminal activity, and the division of investigation shall submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation under the rules established by the United States department of justice for processing and identification of
records. Said records, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the commissioners and shall be made a part of the application.
In the case of private clubs, the officers of said club shall provide fingerprints for each officer.
There shall be a charge for said fingerprint report which must be paid in advance. The amount of the charge shall be as
established by the board of commissioners, from time to time.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.3)
Sec. 6-26. - Character.
In no event shall any license be granted to any person, firm or corporation where any of the individuals, or officers, as the case
may be, have within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, have entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo
contendere, or shall have suffered any conviction of any kind involving particularly, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages, of
the state or of any locality of the United States, if such plea or conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain
the operation for which the applicant is seeking a license in conformity with local, state or federal laws. Should any licensee,
individually, or employee, partner or officer of a licensee corporation, after any license has been granted hereunder, be
convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime as defined herein of the state or any locality of the United States, the
license shall stand revoked and cancelled as to such licensee, subject to the provisions for revocation hereinafter set out.
Private clubs shall submit a list of all dues paying members to the commission.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.4)
Sec. 6-27. - Bond.
All applicants for licenses for the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits (liquor) herein provided shall file for such license
applied for, a personal performance bond in the amount of $2,000.00 issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state,
such bond to ensure compliance with all laws, rules, regulations and resolutions of the county. If the applicant is approved said bonds shall
remain in force so long as the license is valid.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.5)
Sec. 6-28. - Completed application required.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
69/227
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All applications for licenses on the forms provided by the commission shall be completely and fully executed and each question on the
application form shall be answered accurately and under oath. Failure of an applicant to furnish complete answers, as well as failure to
comply with all other prerequisites as herein provided shall be cause for denying the application with prejudice. The willful making of any
false statement as to a material matter on any application for a license to sell malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits (liquor) which shall be
found to be false shall constitute grounds for denying said license or for revocation of any license issued.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.6)
Sec. 6-29. - Execution of application.
If the applicant is an individual, the applicant shall sign the application personally. If the applicant is a firm or partnership, each member
or partner shall execute it. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall be executed by at least two officers of the corporation. If the applicant is a
private club, it shall be executed by at least two officers of said club.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.7)
Sec. 6-30. - Payment of application fee and license fee.
There shall be attached to the application form a bank money order, certified check, or like remittance as an application fee. The amount
of the application fee shall be as established by the board of commissioners, from time to time. There shall also be attached to the
application form a bank money order, certified check, or like remittance for the full amount of the fee for the license applied for. The license
fee shall not be prorated for a part of a year but the full license fee shall be payable for any part of the year. The applicant shall not be
entitled to a return of any portion of the application fee so paid, and the application fee shall not be considered as a part of any license fee
due upon issuance of any license. If the license applied for should not be issued, the applicant shall be entitled to a return of the full amount
of the license fee so paid.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.8)
Sec. 6-31. - Publication of notice.
All persons, firms, partnerships or corporations shall advertise their intention to make application to the commission for issuance of any
license hereunder, and shall be responsible for paying the cost of the advertisement. Such advertisement shall contain a statement of
intention to apply for a license and the type of license to be applied for, shall show the location of the proposed licensed business, and the
name of the applicant. If the applicant is a firm or a partnership, such notice shall show the names of the members or partners, and if a
corporation shall show the names of the corporate officers, and if a private club, the names and addresses of all officers. Said advertisement
shall follow generally the format to be furnished by the clerk. Such notice shall be published twice, on different days, in the official newspaper
of the county in which legal advertisements are published, and shall be published prior to the filing of the application. The applicant shall
obtain an affidavit of publication and attach such affidavit to the application. The advertisement herein prescribed shall not be required of
applicants where the license sought is a renewal of a prior license issued to the same applicant for the same location.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 2.9)
Secs. 6-32—6-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CRITERIA FOR DENIAL AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSES
Sec. 6-51. - Denial of license application; granting.
The county commissioners may deny a county license under this chapter on any of the following grounds:
Failure to meet state requirements for state license;
Failure to pay required fees and taxes;
Failure to provide required valid information, documents and the like;
False information in the application or attached documents;
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
70/227
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Failure to pass review by the sheriff;
Improper residency;
Prior convictions as herein provided;
Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for;
The proposed premises is inappropriate or unsuitable by reason of disturbances or acts of disorderly conduct, violence
or gambling, having occurred in or about said premises;
The existence of dangerous traffic conditions at the proposed premises or a determination by the county commissioners
that the granting of a license would cause dangerous traffic conditions as determined by reports from the sheriff's
department, department of public safety and/or department of transportation; or
A determination by the county commissioners that the granting of the license would adversely affect the neighborhood
or cause a substantial diminution in value of the immediately adjacent and surrounding property.
Otherwise, the county commissioners may issue any county license provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.1)
Sec. 6-52. - Distances from certain uses.
No application for any license to sell malt beverages or wines shall be approved where the proposed location of the business is within
1,200 feet of a church, school or college campus, or within 1,200 feet of a funeral home or cemetery and 1,200 feet for distilled spirits (liquor).
The distance herein prescribed shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest corner of the building housing the business to the
nearest corner of such church building or funeral home, or to the nearest corner of the school ground, college campus, or cemetery grounds.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.2)
Sec. 6-53. - Payment of fees and taxes.
No application hereunder shall be approved unless the applicant therefor shall have fully paid all license fee and ad valorem taxes due to
the county.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.3)
Sec. 6-54. - Prerequisites.
No application hereunder shall be approved until all the prerequisites as set out in article II of this chapter shall have been fully and
completely complied with.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.4)
Sec. 6-55. - Other criteria.
In determining whether or not any application hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of this chapter, the following
shall be considered by the commission in the public interest and welfare and no application shall be approved when it is found that:
The applicant or any employee of the business is then afflicted with alcoholism or other clearly defined alcoholic
beverage use problems, and no person known to the licensee to be so afflicted may at any time be employed by the
licensee in the licensed business.
The applicant or any employee of the business has at any time previously had a malt beverage or alcoholic beverage
license revoked at any location, whether in the county or otherwise.
If the applicant has any interest in or is employed at more than two other such licensed business at any separate
location.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.5)
Sec. 6-56. - Public hearing.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
71/227
(a)
After receipt of the application and all other prerequisites as herein set out, the clerk shall review the application and shall submit the
application to the board for approval. If, the board upon consideration, finds that the application fails to satisfy any of the requirements for
issuance of a license, the board shall take no action at such time, but shall notify the applicant in writing mailed to the address given in the
application, or have the written application personally delivered to the applicant with an affidavit of service returned to the clerk, so that such
notification shall be received at least three days prior to a day and time certain set for a hearing before the full commission. Said notice shall
state specifically the time, date and place for the hearing, a complete statement of the requirements which have not been satisfied and upon
which the commission proposes to take action, that the applicant must appear in person and has the right to be accompanied by an attorney,
the names of any witnesses at the time known who may be called by the commission and that the applicant shall have the right to confront
and cross examine such witnesses, that the applicant has the right to call any witnesses in the applicant's behalf who may be examined by
the commission, and that all testimony and evidence shall be introduced and given under oath and shall be recorded. If the applicant fails to
appear and has not been excused or granted an extension of time, the application shall be denied. If the applicant appears and fails to satisfy
the requirements of this chapter as stated in the written notice, the application shall be denied. If the applicant appears and all requirements
are satisfied, the application shall be granted.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.6)
Sec. 6-57. - Rehearing.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation aggrieved by any act or omission of the commission with respect to its proceedings as to the
issuance of a license hereunder shall have the right to move for a rehearing and reconsideration of the matter. Such motion for rehearing
shall be filed within five days after the action complained of, shall be in writing and shall outline the manner in which such protestant believes
that the commission has erred, that the motion relates to a matter as to which evidence has been heard, no additional evidence or argument
shall be permitted on the motion for rehearing except after a grant thereof by the commission for good cause shown. If the matter of which
complaint is made was not the subject of a prior hearing at which the protestant was permitted to be present and heard, the commission
shall afford a rehearing within 20 days after the filing of the motion, with at least three days written notice having been served upon the
protestant, which notice shall state the protestant has the right to appear in person at a date and time specified in said notice, and that the
protestant shall be allowed to be represented by counsel, and may introduce oral and documentary evidence under oath, and may examine
and cross examine witnesses.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 3.7)
Secs. 6-58—6-87. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSES
Sec. 6-88. - Transferability.
No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferrable, and in the event a licensed business is moved, sold or closed or no
longer directly operated by the licensee, the licensee shall immediately surrender the business' license to the clerk. All licenses shall be issued
to specific persons, firms, partnerships or corporations and for a specific location. Changes of business interest from one party at interest
named in the original application to another party at interest named in the original application shall not be deemed a transfer of a license. In
such instance, however, the licensee shall notify the clerk in writing of such change, and fully disclose the facts in connection therewith, within
ten days from the date of such change.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.1)
Sec. 6-89. - Renewals.
The issuance of a license hereunder for any calendar year or portion thereof shall not be deemed to vest the licensee or any
person having an interest in the business with any right to automatic renewal thereof. The duration and renewal of licenses
under this chapter shall be as for a business license generally. Upon the expiration of any license by its terms, the licensee
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
72/227
(b)
shall be required to apply for a new license for the succeeding calendar year, except as otherwise provided herein. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent a licensee from applying for a renewal license for the succeeding calendar year within a period
of 60 days next prior to the expiration of the license then held.
No license issued under this chapter may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.2)
Sec. 6-90. - Term of license.
All licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire, regardless of the date of issuance, on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.3)
Sec. 6-91. - Sale to persons under the age of 21 years.
No licensee shall furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any person in his employ to furnish any malt beverages or wine to any
person under the age of 21. The licensee shall be held responsible for any such sale made by the licensee's employees or others in the
licensed business premises. The prohibition of this section includes the sale, gift or any other furnishing of malt beverages or wine to persons
under the age of 21 years as provided by state law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.4)
Sec. 6-92. - Posting of notice.
The holder of any license hereunder shall post in a conspicuous place in the license holder's place of business a notice with letters not
less than four inches in height which shall be clearly visible to all customers entering the establishment, as follows: "Sale of Malt Beverages,
Beer, Wine and/or Distilled Spirits (Liquor) to Persons Under the age of 21 is Strictly Prohibited."
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.5)
Sec. 6-93. - Elections.
Sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits shall be allowed on election days provided said sale is not prohibited by state or
federal law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.6)
Sec. 6-94. - Hours of operation.
No licensee shall engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine and/or distilled spirits (liquor) between the hours of 12:00 midnight on
Saturday night and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning, nor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the other days of the
week.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.7)
Sec. 6-95. - State and federal laws.
No licensee shall engage in the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits in violation of any state or federal law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.8)
Sec. 6-96. - Open to inspection.
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the
business, be open to inspection by an officer of the sheriff's department or any licensed inspector of the county or to any person designated
by the sheriff or commissioners. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the
owners or their agents must notify the county sheriff's department and be available for inspection by a sheriff's deputy or other licensed
inspection in the event inspection is deemed necessary.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.9)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
73/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Sec. 6-97. - Consumption on premises.
No retail dealer for the sale of wine, beverages and/or distilled spirits (liquor) shall allow wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits (liquor)
to be consumed on the retail dealer's premises. Any dealer with a license shall be held responsible for such consumption by the dealer's
customers or other parties. This section shall not apply however to holders of a private club license.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.10)
Sec. 6-98. - Familiarity with resolution.
All holders of a license for the sale of wines, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits (liquor) shall keep a copy of this chapter in the license
holder's premises and instruct any person working there with respect to the terms herein, and each licensee and each person selling wine,
malt beverages or distilled spirits (liquor) shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.11)
Sec. 6-99. - Signs.
Licensee shall be allowed to advertise the sale of the beverages herein licensed by use of signs under the following conditions:
Only one sign visible from outside the premises, whether attached to the building or otherwise will be allowed advertising
the sale of beverages hereby licensed for each business establishment which signs may be double faced;
The maximum dimensions for any such sign shall be four feet in height and six feet in width;
Any such sign may be a lighted sign;
All signs advertising the sale of wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits (liquors) must be located on the premises of the
establishment selling the same.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.12)
Sec. 6-100. - Anyone under the age of 21 years; prohibited practice.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to buy or allow to be bought for any person under the age of 21
any alcoholic beverage from any place. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or employed in any place of business
where alcoholic beverages are kept, to permit any person under the age of 21 years to buy or to allow to be bought for any
person under the age of 21 years any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 21 years when on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or outside of a motor vehicle, to have in
such person's possession or under such person's control any alcoholic beverage. Any attempt to commit any act made
unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the magistrate court or superior court.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to falsely misrepresent such person's age, in any manner
whatsoever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in such person's employment under 21 years of age to sell any
alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age who
are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold
for consumption off the premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the age of 21 years, to have in such person's possession, or under such
person's control, at any place whatever in the unincorporated areas of the county, any alcoholic beverage.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee not to post in a conspicuous place in said licensee's establishment a sign printed letters at
least four inches high reading as follows:
"SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO ANYONE UNDER THE AGE OF 21 STRICTLY PROHIBITED".
Violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable in the county
magistrate court or superior court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 years
shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court code of the state.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.13)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
74/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 6-101. - Furnishing to certain other persons prohibited.
No licensee shall sell or permit to be sold or otherwise furnished any wine or malt beverages to any person who is physically or mentally
incapacitated due to the consumption of any alcoholic beverage or drugs.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 4.14)
Sec. 6-102. - License fees.
The amounts of the fees for a package store license in malt beverages and/or wine, a package store license in distilled spirits (liquors), or
a private club license shall be as established by the board of commissioners, from time to time.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, pt. 6)
Secs. 6-103—6-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - REVOCATIONS
Sec. 6-131. - Grounds for suspension or revocation.
The following shall be considered just cause for suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder:
The performance of any act prohibited by this chapter or the failure to perform any act required by this chapter, as well
as the violation of any state, local or federal law, particularly, but not limited to those involving alcoholic beverages, if
such violation tends to indicate that the licensee will not maintain the operation of the business licensed in conformity
with state, local or federal laws. If such act, omission or violation is done by any agent, servant, employee or officer of the
licensee, the lack of knowledge on the part of the licensee or the lack of authorization for such act or omission or
violation shall be no defense.
The entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the conviction of any licensee, partner, or any officer of a licensee
corporation with respect to a charge or violation of any of the laws of the state or the United States or any locality
particularly but not limited to those involving alcoholic beverages, if such violation tends to indicate that the licensee will
not maintain the operation of the business licensed in conformity with state, local or federal laws.
The occurrence on three or more occasions within any 12-month period on the licensed premises of fights, disorderly
conduct, drunkenness, breach of the peace and other similar conduct whether the same be committed by the licensee or
by customers or by others.
Any violation of the reasons given to deny a license under this chapter shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of
said license by the commissioners. In addition, if the owner or manager of the licensed business violates any other terms
and provisions of this article or knowingly allows others to violate them while in the licensed establishment or its parking
lot, then this shall also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 5.1)
Sec. 6-132. - Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a definite time or may be revoked if the licensee or any employee
of licensee has been convicted of the violation of any act prohibited by this article or of failure to perform any act required by
this article or is convicted of the violation of any other ordinance of the county or any state or federal law relating to the sale of
alcoholic beverages. The forfeiture of bond or collateral or a plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction for the
purposes of this subsection.
Any license issued under this article may be suspended for a definite time or revoked if the county magistrate court judge has
determined that there is probable cause to believe that the licensee or an employee of licensee has violated a state or federal
law relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. The procedure for making such determination shall be:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
75/227
(1)
(2)
The sheriff, after obtaining reliable information that such a violation has been committed, shall cite the licensee to appear fo
day certain before the county magistrate court and shall advise the licensee of the law believed to have been violated.
The county magistrate court judge, after hearing evidence, shall make a determination whether there is probable cause
to believe the alleged violation has been committed. If the hearing results in a determination that probable cause does
exist, the findings shall be reduced to writing and filed with the clerk, who shall report same to the county commissioners
at the next regular meeting thereof.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 5.2)
Sec. 6-133. - Notice and hearing; appeal.
No licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked unless the licensee has been afforded the opportunity for a hearing
before the county commissioners or a committee designated by the commissioners. The licensee shall be given at least five days' written
notice delivered to the licensee in person or by certified mail of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and the grounds for suspension or
revocation. At such hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney and to have witnesses appear in the
licensee's behalf. All witnesses shall be sworn or shall make affirmation and shall be subject to reasonable cross examination. If a license be
suspended or revoked by a committee designated by the commissioners, such suspension or revocation may be appealed by the licensee to
the county commissioners by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the commissioners within a period of ten days following the date of the
order of the committee suspended or revoking said license and the decision of the commissioners on any such appeal shall be final. The
reason or reasons for suspension or revocation, whether by a committee or by the county commissioners shall be specifically stated in
writing and delivered to the licensees.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 5.3)
Sec. 6-134. - Time limitation on new license.
When a license has been suspended or revoked under the provisions of this article, no application for a new license for the same location
will be received for a period of 12 months thereafter; and no application for a new license from the licensee involved shall be received for a
period of 24 months.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 5.4)
Sec. 6-135. - Rehearing.
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any act or omission of the commission with respect to its proceedings involving revocation
or suspension or forfeiture of any part of a bond under this resolution shall have the right to move for a rehearing. Such motion for rehearing
shall be filed within five days after the act or omission complained of, shall be in writing, and shall outline the manner in which such
protestant believes that the commission has erred. If the motion relates to a matter as to which evidence has already been heard, no
additional evidence or argument shall be permitted on the motion for rehearing except after a grant thereof by the commission. If the matter
of which complaint is made is not the subject of a prior hearing at which the protestant was permitted to be present and heard, the
commission shall afford a hearing within ten days after the filing of the motion, of which three days written notice shall be given to the
protestant, at which rehearing the protestant shall be allowed to appear, be represented by counsel, introduce oral and documentary
evidence, and examine and cross examine witnesses.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 5.5)
Secs. 6-136—6-176. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - TAXES ON WINE, MALT BEVERAGES AND DISTILLED SPIRITS
Sec. 6-177. - License fee for wholesale dealers.
The license fee for a wholesale dealer shall be in an amount as established by the board of commissioners, from time to time.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 7.2)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
76/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Sec. 6-178. - Taxes on wine.
It is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer or distributor, distributing wine to retail dealers within the limits
of the county and outside of the corporate limits of any municipality within said county a wine tax of $0.22 per liter and a
proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter.
The tax herein levied shall be paid by each wholesale dealer who has sold wine within the county, and outside the corporate
limits of any municipality within said county. Each wholesale dealer or distributor shall file a report by the tenth of each month
itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantity of all wine, by size and type of container for the month sold
within the county, and outside the corporate limits of any municipality within the county. Each such wholesale dealer or
distributor shall remit to the county, on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales
were made, the amount of tax due in accordance with this resolution.
No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required to be affixed to wine sold within the county, outside the
corporate limits of any municipality within the county.
The wine taxes herein provided shall be in addition to any license fee, tax, or charge which may now be imposed upon the
business of selling wine at retail or wholesale within the county, outside the corporate limits of any municipality within the
county.
The failure to make a timely report and remittance as provided for in this section, shall render a wholesale dealer for a penalty
equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were
due and further penalty of 25 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion
thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the
wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be
required under an accurate and truthful report.
Said tax may be adjusted from time to time to comply with applicable state and federal law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 7.3)
Sec. 6-179. - Tax on malt beverages.
Except as provided hereinafter, there is hereby levied and opposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within
the county, outside the corporate limits of any municipality within said county, an excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12-
ounce or proportionately thereof, of malt beverages sold by such wholesale dealer within the county, outside the corporate
limits of any municipality within said county.
All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be
subject to the excise tax provided for hereinabove, but in lieu thereof there is hereby imposed upon such wholesale dealer
selling malt beverages within the county, outside the corporate limits of any municipality within said county, and excise tax of
$6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the county, and a
like rate for fractional parts thereof.
Each wholesale dealer who has sold malt beverages within the county shall file a report by the tenth day of each month
itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all malt beverages by size and type of container for the
month sold within the county. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the county, on the tenth day of the month next
succeeding the calendar month in which sales were made, the amount of tax due in accordance with this provision.
No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on malt beverages sold within the county, outside the corporate
limits of any municipality within the county.
The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now be imposed
upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale within the county.
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of
the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report or remittance were due and a further
penalty of 25 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which
said report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making
such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an
accurate and truthful report.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
77/227
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Said tax may be adjusted from time to time to comply with applicable state and federal law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 7.4)
Sec. 6-180. - Tax on distilled spirits (liquors).
Except as provided hereinafter, there is hereby levied and opposed upon each wholesale dealer selling distilled spirits (liquor)
within the county, outside the corporate limits of any municipality within said county, an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per
liter or $0.65 per ounce and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter or an ounce.
Each wholesale dealer who has sold distilled spirits (liquor) within the county, shall file a report by the tenth day of each month
itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all distilled spirits (liquor) by size and type of container for
the month sold within the county. Each such wholesale dealer shall remit to the county, on the tenth day of the month next
succeeding the calendar month in which sales were made, the amount of tax due in accordance with this resolution.
No decal, stamp or other identifying marking shall be required on distilled spirits (liquor) sold within the county, outside the
corporate limits of any municipality within the county.
The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may not be imposed
upon the business of selling distilled spirits (liquor) retail or wholesale within the county.
The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of
the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report or remittance were due and a further
penalty of 25 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which
said report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making
such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an
accurate and truthful report.
Said tax shall be adjusted from time to time to comply with applicable state and federal law.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 7.5)
Sec. 6-181. - Failure to make timely reports.
The failure of any wholesale dealer in wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits (liquor) to make a timely report or remittance as
provided in this article, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the license issued to buy in
the county, to said wholesale dealer. Any such revocation may be made by the commission upon a hearing granted to said wholesale dealer
after written notice to the dealer made at least three days prior to the date for said hearing which notice shall specify the time, place and
purpose of the hearing and the statement of the specific charge upon which the commission proposes to take action. At such hearing, the
dealer shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, and evidence shall be given under oath, and the commission and the dealer
shall have the right to examine and cross examine witnesses. The dealer shall have the rights to present documents and records pertaining to
said matter, and the commission shall have the right to inspect and examine such records and documents.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 7.6)
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1
et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26.
Sec. 10-1. - Adoption by reference.
Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the state minimum codes enumerated under
O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law, as listed in this section are adopted by reference and
incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
78/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
International Building Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007.
International Residential Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008.
International Fire Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008.
International Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008.
International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008.
International Fuel Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008.
National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006.
International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2009.
International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, as amended.
International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2006 edition, as amended.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-1)
Sec. 10-2. - Land use.
Minimum acres. Each lot (whether in commercial subdivision or not) located in the unincorporated areas of the county will be
determined by the zoning and the zoning requirements in the county zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A to this Code.
Road frontage. Each lot in commercial subdivision must have a minimum of 100-foot frontage on either federal, state, or
county maintained road for all lots. This provision applies only to lots lying and being in a commercial subdivision. All
commercial subdivisions developments must have a accurate survey setting forth all lots to be sold in the subdivision and said
survey shall be presented to the county board of commissioners or their representative for approval before any lots may be
sold or divided. Any streets located in a subdivision must meet the state department of transportation requirement for density
and width. The county does require that the subdivision roads be paved and they must also meet the minimum requirement
of the state department of transportation prior to being accepted by and maintained by the county.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-2)
Sec. 10-3. - Conicts and enforcement.
If any of the publications listed in section 10-1 are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then
the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in section 10-1 are less stringent than the state
minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., the state minimum code shall control.
The county manager or the county manager's designee shall enforce the state minimum codes adopted herein.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-3)
Sec. 10-4. - References to ocials in adopted technical codes.
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this
chapter, then that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code shall be
deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-4)
Sec. 10-5. - Permitting process; building permits and administration of construction codes.
All applications for building permits, grading plans, and land disturbance permits will be made to the building department.
Only two complete sets of plans will be submitted at this time. No other department will accept these types of plans.
After certification that plans are complete and the appropriate number of sets of plans is submitted to the building
department only, the building department will route plans to the departments whose review is required. Those departments
will have the number of days as listed in the developer's handbook to complete their review. All approved plans will be
submitted to the building department by the various departments and a permit will be issued. If there are deficiencies in the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
79/227
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
plans, the reviewing department will notify the building department in writing as soon as possible, but not wait until the end of
the review period. The building department will then notify the applicant in writing of the needed corrections. When all items
have been corrected, permits will be issued.
All progress and final inspections will be coordinated through the building department. Applicants/contractors will call for
inspection and a log will be made of each type of inspection requested. At the end of each day, inspection will fax or email a list
of all scheduled inspections to the appropriate department. When all final inspections have been completed, a certificate of
occupancy will be issued. To make this work correctly, several points are important:
Plans will not be accepted for review at any department other than inspection. This will ensure that the review is
coordinated and maintained. Additionally, all fees will be paid at the inspection department.
Should a department have a question regarding something in the plan, it will be possible for that department to contact
the applicant/engineer to resolve the question.
The building department will monitor all of the review process. On a quarterly basis, the county manager will be provided
a report on the status of all project reviews.
The fees for the reinspections, review of plans, subsequent reviews, additional plan review, and building permits shall be as
established by the board of county commissioners, from time to time, and are available for public examination in the offices of
the building department or the county clerk, and are listed in the fee schedule kept on file in the office of the clerk.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-5)
Sec. 10-6. - Scope of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of buildings or structures, and plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems within the rural area of the
county. Any and all requirements of this chapter shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the county pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-6)
Sec. 10-7. - Applicability.
Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or related to buildings, structures, equipment or
systems. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement
and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern.
Existing installations. Buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued
if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created
by such building, structure or system.
Work to conform to codes. No building, structure, system, appliance or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this chapter,
shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired, except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and this
Code.
Public utility services. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and
including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of a system owned or operated by a public utility
service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the
exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such.
Other laws. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal laws.
Referenced codes and standards. The state codes adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered part of the
requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between provisions of
this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
Additions, alternations or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any building, structure or system shall conform to that
required for a new building, structure or system without requiring the existing building, structure or system to comply with all
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
80/227
(h)
(i)
(j)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
requirements of this chapter. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure or system to
become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded.
Ordinary repairs. Ordinary repairs shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided
that such repairs are replacements and are not hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare.
Change in occupant/occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupant or occupancy of any building or
structure that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. Prior to the issuance of any business occupation tax certificate,
the director of finance shall advise the building official that an application for a business occupation tax certificate has been
submitted to the county for review. Prior to the issuance of the business occupation tax certificate, the building official shall
inspect the building to be occupied and certify that such building or structure meets the intent of the provisions of law
governing building construction for the proposed new occupant or occupancy and that such change of occupant or occupancy
does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.
Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing
or proposed building, structure or system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this
Code shall be determined by the director of planning and development services.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-7)
Sec. 10-8. - Enforcement.
Authority. The building department/code enforcement department is responsible for administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
Deputies and authorized representatives. In accordance with prescribed procedures of the county, the building official shall
have the authority when needed to appoint a deputy building official, authorized representatives, technical officers, inspectors,
plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as authorized by law and delegated by the building
official.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-8)
Sec. 10-9. - Duties and powers of the building ocial.
Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the adopted
state codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes
and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the
force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the
adopted state codes.
Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and plans, issue
permits for the erection, construction, alteration and demolition of buildings and structures and installation of mechanical,
plumbing, gas and electrical systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code.
Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to
accept reports of inspection by approved qualified agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and
be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
Identification. The building official, deputy or authorized representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting
buildings, structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter.
Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the building
official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is
contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the
building official is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building, structure or premises is occupied, that credentials be presented
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
81/227
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make
a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued,
fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained for the period required by
state law for retention of public records.
Approved materials, equipment, appliances and devices. Materials, equipment, appliances and devices approved by the
building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
Areas prone to flooding. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provisions related to areas prone to flooding
as established by the flood insurance rate map, as may hereafter be amended, without meeting the intent and purpose of
chapter 18, flood damage prevention, or the granting of a variance to such provisions by the floodplain management review
board. The county manager or designee will enforce the county flood damage prevention ordinance in chapter 18 on all areas
that are prone to flooding under FEMA risk map system and any state system now or hereafter revised or modified.
Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment and appliances. The provisions of this chapter are not
intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any designs, methods of construction, equipment or
appliances not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternatives have been approved by the building
official in writing. Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances shall be approved in
writing where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent and purpose of
the provisions of this chapter, and the material, methods of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent
of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a
material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative
materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no
expense to the county. Such tests shall be paid for by the person seeking to rely on such alternative materials or methods.
Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter, the codes or by other recognized test standards. In the
absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures.
Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the building official.
Test reports. The building official shall retain reports of tests for the period required for retention of public records and attach
the documentation to the building permit.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-9)
Sec. 10-10. - Permits.
Required. A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, erection, alteration or repair to a building or structure,
mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system, other than ordinary
repairs. Permits shall be obtained before beginning work. Permits or emergency work shall be obtained within 24 hours after
work is commenced.
Exception. Ordinary repairs to a single-family residential building or structure for which the wholesale cost does not exceed
$500.00, which includes labor (twice the cost of the material, not hourly pay) plus material cost, shall not be required to obtain
a permit. Upon request of the inspector a proof of this cost will be requested and reviewed to confirm the dollar value in this
section.
Repair rule. The term "repair" means fixing, mending, maintenance, replacement or restoring of a part or portions of real
property to good condition. The repair exception recognized by O.C.G.A. § 43-41-17(g) and this rule shall in no way impact or
diminish the licensing requirements of chapter 14 of title 43 (electrical contracting, plumbing, conditioned air contracting, lowvoltage contracting and utility contracting). Nothing in this rule shall preclude a person or entity (including employees of said
entity) from offering or contracting to perform or undertaking or performing for an owner repair work, provided that:
The person performing the repair work discloses in writing to the owner that such person/entity is not licensed as a
residential or general contractor under this chapter;
The work does not entail the delegation or assignment to or engagement of any person or entity, other than employees,
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
82/227
(3)
(4)
(d)
(e)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(3)
a.
b.
(4)
a.
to supervise, manage or oversee the performance of any portion of the work undertaken;
The work does not affect the life safety requirements or structural integrity of the real property. Such repairs shall not
include the removal or addition of any load bearing wall or the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing
support; and
The person performing repair must obtain permits and inspections as required by the local authority.
Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any person, contractor or
company commencing any work on a building or structure, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or system electrical system before
obtaining the required permit shall be subject to a penalty of 200 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required
permit fee.
Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or
ordinances of the county. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building.
Fences not over eight feet (2,438 millimeters) high.
Residential storage buildings and playhouses less than 200 square feet (in area without an electrical, mechanical, or
plumbing system).
Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 liters) and the ratio
of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one.
Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work where there has been no change
in occupant, occupancy, and any supporting structural elements to a building or structure.
Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 millimeters) deep and are installed entirely above
ground.
Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.
Window awnings supported by an exterior wall.
Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1753 millimeters) in height.
Any structure that is less than or equal to 200 square feet for the use of a well house or tool storage area. If this
structure has electricity supplied to it, a permit needs to be purchased for the electrical installation.
Note—A permit is still required at no charge when any and all pole style constructed barn/shelters which have no supporting walls, electrical
or sanitation systems and are used for the sole purpose to protect equipment/machinery from the elements.
Note—There will be permit and a charge when any and all pole style constructed barn/shelters which have walls, electrical and/or sanitation
systems present, whether it was at the initial building or as an addition and will be inspected and held to the state construction requirements.
Electrical.
Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved
portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
Radio and television transmitting stations. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but
permits are required for equipment and wiring for power supply, the installation of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas.
Portable heating appliances.
Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such
equipment unsafe.
Mechanical.
Portable heating appliances.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
83/227
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(5)
a.
b.
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Portable ventilation equipment.
Portable cooling unit.
Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter.
Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
Portable evaporative cooler.
Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kilograms) or less of refrigerant and actuated by
motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing.
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap,
drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection
made as provided in this chapter.
The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipe, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of
water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or
fixtures.
Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished
by the building department for that purpose. Such application shall:
Have proof of a valid state contractor license and picture identification.
Have a valid business license from any town or county in the state.
Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, legal description or similar description
that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or structure or work.
Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
Be accompanied by construction plans and documents and any other information that the building department or
designee may require to ascertain whether the proposed building meets the requirements of this chapter.
State the valuation of the proposed work.
Contain the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant/contractor and the property owner and shall
be signed by the applicant/contractor and/or the property owner.
The building official may require any additional information to be provided so that an understanding of all work to be
performed can be ascertained from the permit application.
State number of areas to be disturbed.
Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments
thereto within a reasonable time after filing but no later than 30 calendar days after the filing of a complete application in
conformity with this section. If the application or the construction plans or documents do not conform to the requirements of
this chapter, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the building official is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall issue a permit
therefore as soon as practicable.
Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned
180 days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. The building official is authorized to grant up to three written
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each before such application is declared abandoned. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any local, state or federal law or any provision of this Code. Permits presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this Code shall not be valid and are void.
The issuance of a permit based on construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official
from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The building official is also
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
84/227
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
(2)
(m)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(c)
authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a building or structure where there exists any violation of this chapter or of any
other provisions of the Code, the county zoning ordinances, or where there exists a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of
the public or the occupants of the building or structure.
Expiration of permit. Every permit issued shall become invalid and of no force and effect if the work on the site authorized by
such permit is not commenced or if no county inspection has been performed within 180 calendar days after its issuance, or if
the work authorized on the site by such permit has been commenced and has been suspended or abandoned or no further
county inspection has been performed for a period of 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant one written
extension of the permit for a period of not more than 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated.
Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter if the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any
applicable provision of this Code or the county zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A to this Code.
Contractor change, reissuing of permit.
No permit shall be reissued on any work or job site for which a permit already exists except after notification in writing
from the owner of the change in contractor and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit the
work. Reissuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all work or
code deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the previous or former contractor.
The contractor, who re-permits the work or job, shall pay a re-permit fee equal to the percentage of work remaining
based on the original permit fee, provided the scope of work has not changed. Any additional scope of work will not be
considered to be included in the original permit fee and will be charged at the set rates for such additional work.
Placement of building permit, inspections card, and construction plans. The building permit or copy, inspections card, and
construction plans shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the work. The inspections checklist card shall be
posted within 36 to 48 inches above grade facing the street or in a window of the structure under construction in a manner
where it is visible from the street and if outside, in a weatherproof cover. The construction plans shall be kept on the
construction site in a manner that they can be produced upon demand by the building official.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-10)
Sec. 10-11. - Construction plans and documents.
Submittal of plans and documents.
Constructions plans and documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be
submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction plans and documents shall be
prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional as deemed necessary by the building official or required
otherwise by any section of this Code. When the building official is unable to make a determination as to the grant or
denial of a permit based upon the plans submitted with a permit application, the building official is authorized to require
additional construction plans and documents to be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional.
The building official is authorized to waive in writing the submission of construction plans and documents and other data
required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such
that reviewing of construction plans and documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. In addition,
construction plans and documents for single-family residential construction do not have to be prepared by a registered
design professional unless required by the building official in writing.
Information on construction plans and documents. Construction plans and documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon
suitable material. Electronic media construction plans and documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the
building official. Construction plans and documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws and
regulations.
Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system shall be submitted to indicate
conformance with this chapter and the construction plans and documents and shall be approved by both the building official
and the appropriate fire marshal prior to the start of system installation.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
85/227
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
Manufacturer's installation instructions for residential installation. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by the inte
residential codes, shall be available on the residential job site at the time of inspection.
Exterior wall envelope. Construction plans and documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in
sufficient detail to determine compliance with this chapter. The construction plans and documents shall provide details of the
exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control
joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water resistive membrane, and details around openings.
Manufacturing installation instructions. The construction plans and documents shall include manufacturing installation
instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the
construction plans and documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting
documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure
used.
Site plan. The construction plans and documents submitted with the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
a site plan approved by the planning and development services department in accordance with the guidelines set out in the
zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code. For example, the site plan shall be shown to scale the size and location of new
construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed
finished grades. Additionally the site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of
demolition, the site plan shall show the construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and
construction that are to remain on the site or lot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify in writing the
requirement for a site plan.
Examination of construction plans and documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the
accompanying construction plans and documents and shall ascertain by such examination whether the proposed construction
indicated and described is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of the
International Building Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007; International Residential Code, 2006 edition, with
Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008; International Fire Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008; International
Plumbing Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008; International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, with
Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008; International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008;
National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006; and International Energy Conservation Code, 2009
edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. The reference to the Codes will include any and all subsequent and
future amendment to these codes. This also includes all updates and required International Building Codes from the date of
the ordinance from which this section is derived and all future ordinances and codes as required by the state will be enforced.
Approval of construction plans and documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction plans and
documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as being in compliance with this chapter. However, the approval of
construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors
in the construction plans and documents and other data. One set of construction plans and documents so reviewed shall be
retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be
open to inspection by the building official.
Previous approvals. The enactment of this chapter shall not require changes in the construction plans and documents,
construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued prior to enactment of this
chapter and the construction of which has been pursued and not abandoned within 180 days after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a
building or structure before the construction plans and documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted,
provided that construction plans and documents and adequate information and detailed statements have been filed
complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the approved part of the building construction operation and
without any assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted by the building official.
Design professional in responsible charge.
When it is required and requested by the building official that construction plans and documents be prepared by a
registered design professional (a professional engineer or architect licensed by the state), the design professional shall be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
86/227
(2)
(m)
(1)
(2)
(n)
(o)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(c)
registered in the state and shall affix such seal on all documents. The building official shall be authorized to require the
owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the
registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute
registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered
design professional in responsible charge. The owner shall notify the building official in writing if the registered design
professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties required by this Code.
The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal
plans and documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the
design of the building.
Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are
not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.
Deferral of any submittal items shall require prior approval by the building official. The registered design professional in
responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction plans and documents for review by the building
official.
Submittal construction plans and documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design
professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation
indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general
conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and
submittal plans and documents have been approved by the building official in writing.
Amended construction plans and documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction plans and
documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction plans and
documents shall be resubmitted by the holder of the building permit for approval as an amended set of construction plans
and documents before work is conducted.
Retention of construction plans and documents. One set of approved construction plans and documents shall be retained by
the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work or as required by
state or local laws.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-11)
Sec. 10-12. - Requirements for construction.
A permit application for a building permit shall include a site plan. The site plan shall delineate the proposed grading for the
entire site, the storm water control measures proposed to protect adjacent properties, erosion control, and water quality
measures.
An applicant shall also indicate on the site plan the location of the following construction-related items:
Dumpsters or other on-site disposal equipment;
Portable toilets;
On-site parking for construction vehicles;
Construction material staging and storage;
Borrow or stockpile areas; and
Inspection card/permit display board posted at the location which will contain:
Contact numbers of all contractors;
Permits issues;
Plans;
Inspection report;
Emergency contact numbers in case of a job site incident.
Dumpsters or any on-site waste disposal equipment may not be located on the street. If adequate traffic controls can be
implemented, the director of planning and development services and/or the director of engineering may approve the
placement of dumpsters and on-site waste disposal equipment on a street so long as the street has a paved width greater
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
87/227
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
than 24 feet. There must also be a proof of proper disposal of contents such as a weight ticket from a waste station if
nonconventional disposal equipment is being used.
Portable toilets shall be located off of the right-of-way and at least 15 feet from any side property line.
Wherever possible, temporary parking shall be provided on site and not on the street.
The distance between a retaining wall and the property line shall be equal to at least half of the distance between the property
line and the required setback line. Newly constructed retaining walls shall not be higher than four feet; however, existing
retaining walls may be repaired and replaced so long as the height or the repaired or replaced wall does not increase in height
over the original height of the wall.
Existing drainage patterns located along property lines shall not be adversely affected by construction of a building or any
associated site work.
The applicant for construction on any lot shall be responsible for ensuring that all existing sewer services and taps from the
buildings to the street shall be inspected and verified to be in proper condition prior to connection.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-12)
Sec. 10-13. - Demolition permits.
A demolition site plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application package. The demolition site plan shall depict the trees,
structures and impervious surfaces to be removed; location and size of all trees greater than six inches DBH; construction exits; tree save
areas and best managements practices for erosion control.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-13)
Sec. 10-14. - Temporary structures and uses.
Generally. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall
be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant
one written extension of 90 days. The request for extension shall be in writing and shall specify the justifiable cause.
Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress,
accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and
general welfare.
Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an
electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy has
been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary
lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code.
Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to
order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued for violation of the code or applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-14)
Sec. 10-15. - Permit fees; revocation.
Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law and the governing authority has been paid. No
amendment to a permit shall be released to the applicant until the additional permit fee, if any, has been paid. Any and all
work started before fee payment is subject to a fine as stated in this regulation.
Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees for buildings, structures, mechanical, gas, plumbing and electrical systems shall be
determined by the governing authority of the county. The schedule of fees approved by the governing authority of the county
shall be maintained by the building department who will retain a copy which will be available for public inspection. There shall
be a minimum fee of $50.00, plus an application fee for permits purchased in the county unless stated by federal, state, or
local laws
Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with
or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the
payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
88/227
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
Refunds. The governing authority is authorized to adopt a written refund policy that applies to the refund of permit fees authoriz
chapter.
Revocation of certificates. A certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant issued
pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the building department or designee and
considered void, if:
The application for a certificate of occupancy contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted
material facts in the application;
Changes or alterations in the type of permitted use or occupancy occur without approval required by this Code;
Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate occur without approval required by this Code;
Alterations, additions or improvements to the building, structure or systems occur without approval or without obtaining
all necessary permits required by this Code;
The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, state or
federal law or codes;
The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare.
Denial of certificate. No certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant shall be issued
pursuant to any provision of this chapter to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within 12
months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business or legally or
organizationally related entity requesting a certificate has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location
based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any
material facts in any application.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-15)
Sec. 10-16. - Inspections.
Generally. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such
construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an
inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other applicable
provisions of the code. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other
provisions of the code shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official not the county shall be liable for any expense entailed in the
removal of any material required to allow inspection.
Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine buildings, structures and sites for
which an application has been filed.
Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth as follows:
Building.
Foundation and slab inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated, forms are erected, and reinforcement is
installed but before concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and
functional.
Dam proofing inspection. To be made prior to backfill of crawl space or basement foundation walls.
Pre-cladding/frame inspection. To be made after the roof, wall bracing, windows, doors and moisture barrier are
installed and prior to placement of exterior cladding. Rough inspections on trades need not be complete for precladding inspection.
Frame/insulation inspection. To be made after wiring, piping, chimneys, duct and vents to be concealed are in place
and all rough inspections approved, fire blocking is in place and the insulation in walls and inaccessible ceilings is
installed. Insulation values must meet documents submitted with permit application.
Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is completed in compliance with this Code prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
Electrical.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
89/227
a.
b.
c.
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(4)
a.
b.
c.
(5)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, and conduit
and before any backfill or concrete is put in place.
Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, bracing, and wiring are in place and prior to
the installation of insulation and wall and ceiling membranes.
Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is complete, all required electrical outlets, switches and
fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the building or structure is ready for occupancy.
Plumbing.
Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, piping
installed and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must
be in place and functional.
Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all water, soil,
waste and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes.
Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, and all plumbing fixtures and appliances are in place
and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
Testing. Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the standard plumbing code. Tests
shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official.
Mechanical.
Underground and slab inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected,
underground duct and fuel piping is installed and before any backfill and concrete is put in place.
Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct and fuel
piping to be concealed are complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes.
Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system and appliances are in place and
properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy.
Gas.
Rough-in inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such
piping has been covered and concealed or any fixtures or appliances have been connected.
Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, after all portions
which are to be covered or concealed by wall and ceiling membranes, plastering, stone or brickwork have been so
concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. Log lighters shall be permitted
separately and inspected.
Testing. This inspection shall include a gas pressure test.
Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as
may be affected by the new work or any changes, to insure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and to
assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans.
Residential flood plain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of
the International Residential Building Code, and by the state department of natural resources upon placement of the lowest
floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, as required in section R327 of the International Residential Building Code. No work or alteration can be conducted
until this area is determined.
Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed
from view until inspected and approved.
Other inspections. In addition to any other inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections
of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the
code that are enforced by the planning and development services department.
Residential fire-resistance-rated construction inspections. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between
dwelling units or due to the location on the property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
90/227
(h)
(i)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(m)
all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and
finished.
Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to request and accept reports of approved inspection agencies,
provided such agencies satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
Prequalified inspections. Prequalified alternate registered engineer inspections are allowed as follows:
When it is evident that the county cannot provide an inspection service of construction covered by this chapter within
four business days of receiving a valid written request for any inspection, then, in lieu of an inspection by inspections
personnel employed by the county, any person, firm, or corporation engaged in a construction project which requires an
inspection, shall have the option of retaining, at their own expense, a prequalified alternate registered professional
engineer who holds a certificate of registration issued under chapter 15 of title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia and who
is not an employee or otherwise affiliated with or financially interested in such person, firm, or corporation, to provide
the required inspection. Prequalified alternate registered professional engineers shall conduct inspections in accordance
with all applicable provisions of this Code and state law, including, but not limited to, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, as amended.
The county shall provide for the prequalification of alternate registered engineers who may perform inspections
pursuant to this section. A prequalified alternate registered engineer inspector who personally makes the inspection,
shall hold, in addition to the certificate registration required under chapter 15 International Code Council/ICC of title 43 of
the Official Code of Georgia, a certification that matches the inspector's area of expertise. Prequalified alternate
registered engineers may provide inspections in their scope of expertise providing they hold the aforementioned
certifications that match their expertise. In lieu of personally holding an international code council certification, a
registered engineer may employ technicians who hold the required appropriate international code council certifications
to actually make the inspections. These employees shall also be prequalified by the county. Inspection reports submitted
to the county shall contain both the certified technician's signature and the signature and seal of the prequalified
alternate registered engineer and their dates of certification.
Prequalified alternate registered engineer inspections and reports shall be accepted only from persons or firms who have
been prequalified by the board. The requirements, procedures, application forms and report forms shall be as adopted
by the board. Applications for approval as a prequalified alternate registered engineer inspector may be obtained from
the planning and development services department.
Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official
when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for
inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this chapter.
Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either
indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the
permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such
portion shall not be covered on concealed until authorized by the building official.
Reinspection fee. Reinspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the governing
authority when work performed is required to be reinspected due to the following reasons:
The reinspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a previously noted code violation on a prior inspection;
The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed;
The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed;
Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed and proper inspection cannot be performed; or
Prior issuance of a stop work order requires reinspection.
Right of entry. Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building official or designee.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or designee may enter the premises between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. to perform any duty imposed by this chapter provided that the building official or designee has consent to enter the
premises or has obtained and presents an inspection warrant as described in this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-16)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
91/227
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(f)
Sec. 10-17. - Certicates of occupancy, completion and tenancy.
Required. No building or structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in the type of occupancy or the
nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after an appropriate certificate as required by this section has
been issued.
Certificate of occupancy.
Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until the building, structure and intended
use complies with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, all construction is complete and all required final
building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electric, fire, health, vegetation protection and site drainage inspections have been
performed and approved.
Scope. The certificate of occupancy certifies that all final inspections have been completed and the structure has been
erected to the best of the county's knowledge in compliance with applicable code requirements at the time of the
issuance of the certificate. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not excuse the builder, contractor,
tenant, or property owner from liability for any violation of the code or any other applicable laws. Occupancy shall be
limited to the area or portion of a building or structure defined by the building permit for which the certificate of
occupancy is issued.
Temporary certificate of occupancy.
Scope. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for nonresidential buildings or portions thereof for a specified
period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding code violations or
deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be made on such form as prescribed by the building official, which will include specific times
and dates for temporary use and shall be signed by the owner/occupant, contractor and/or agent.
Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been
fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed, provided the owner should be aware that in certain
circumstances payment and performance bonds may be required as a condition for a temporary certificate of occupancy.
Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any and/or all
of the following reasons:
Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations.
Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely
manner.
Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for
which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted.
Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.
Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion shall be issued upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure,
and/or plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical system, when a certificate of occupancy is not required. The certificate of
completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Certificate of change of tenant.
Scope. A certificate of change of tenant shall be required whenever there is a change of tenant occupancy in any
nonresidential building, structure or use and no construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building,
structure, plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems have been or are to be made. The new tenant or building
owner shall be required to submit current as-built floor and fixture plans for review and complete a repair/improvement
declaration.
Permits required. If the change of tenant involves any construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building,
plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems, all necessary permits required by this chapter shall be obtained by
licensed qualified contractors and all necessary inspections shall be performed by the building official before a change of
tenant, or if required, a new certificate of occupancy is issued.
Contents of certificates. Certificates shall contain the following:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
92/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
The building permits number (or in the case of a certificate of completion, the appropriate trade permit number).
The address of the structure.
The name and address of the owner.
A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.
A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
The name of the building official.
The name and state license number of all contractor and subcontractor in the construction, repair, and alteration of the
structure.
The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
If nonresidential, the use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of the International Building
Code.
If nonresidential, the type of construction as defined in chapter 6 of the International Building Code.
If nonresidential, the design occupant loads.
If an automatic sprinkler is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.
Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
Revocation of certificates. The building official or designee may revoke certificates of occupancy, certificates of completion, and
certificates of change of tenant issued under provisions of this chapter, where it is shown that there have been either one or
more of the following:
Changes or alterations in construction, type of permitted use or occupancy without written approval by the building
official or designee.
Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate without written approval by the building official or designee.
Alterations, additions, or improvements to the building, structure, or systems without permits and inspections required
by this chapter.
Violation of any zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations.
Any condition that may affect the building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director of planning
and development services, renders the building, structure or service system unsafe, dangerous or uninhabitable.
After a certificate has been revoked, a valid certificate shall not be issued until all violations, changes, alterations,
additions or improvements meet all requirements of this chapter as determined by the building official.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-17)
Sec. 10-18. - Utility service connections.
Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building
or system that is regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official.
Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized until all
required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, drainage, vegetation, fire and health inspections have been
performed and approved by the appropriate city or state department or official.
Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply
house line has been tested, inspected and approved and all appliance and equipment connections have been inspected and
approved.
Temporary electrical and gas service connections. Temporary electrical and gas service and meter connections may be
authorized for a specified period of time when the system has been inspected and found to be safe for the connections and
use authorized. Such temporary service connections shall be authorized only for the following reasons:
Testing of appliances and equipment.
Temporary occupancy of the building or structure only for the training of employees or stocking of merchandise.
Single-tenant occupancy buildings and multitenant occupancy buildings for which temporary service connections have
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
93/227
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(1)
been authorized shall not be allowed access by the general public for business activity other than those allowed in
subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section.
Authority to disconnect utility services. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service
to the building, structure or system regulated by this chapter in case of an emergency, where necessary to eliminate an
immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system
shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting,
the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water
distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this chapter that has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building
official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-18)
Sec. 10-19. - Violations, remedies and penalties.
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove,
demolish or occupy any building, structure, system or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code.
Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure,
system or equipment in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate of occupancy under
the provisions of this chapter. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance or correction of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
Penalties. Any person failing to discontinue, correct or abate the violation of this chapter as ordered by the building official in
the notice shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the county court to answer a change of violations of this
chapter and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance to section 10-17. Where any
offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-19)
Sec. 10-20. - Stop work order.
Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's
agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop
work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to correct a violation or an unsafe condition, shall be subject to issuance of a court
citation to appear in the court of the county and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance
with section 10-17. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-20)
Sec. 10-21. - Inspection warrants.
The building official, in addition to other procedures provided by law, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions
specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the building official to conduct a search or inspection of property without
the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section.
Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the
following conditions are met:
The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
94/227
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(d)
(1)
inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property, or that there is probable
cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of
that property;
The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this division and all other applicable law;
The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant;
The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur
and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably
determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes a search or inspection;
The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the search or inspection is intended to
check or reveal; and
The warrant refers, in general terms, to the provisions of the code or state law sought to be enforced.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-21)
Sec. 10-22. - Unsafe structures and equipment.
Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, uninhabitable, or which constitute a fire
hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, shall be taken down and removed or rehabilitated
pursuant to County Ordinance No. 06-103.
Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the building,
structure or system found to be unsafe, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the
required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be
demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building
official written acceptance or rejection of the terms of the notice.
Method of service.
Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is:
Delivered to the owner personally;
Sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address with the return
receipt requested.
If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing
manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the building or structure shall constitute service of
notice upon the owner.
Restoration. The building, structure, system or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be
restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs
during the restoration of the building, structure, system or equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions or change of
occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. The time limit to bring the building, structure, system or
equipment will be determined by the building official and noted on the permits that are purchased to restore to a safe
condition the structure, system or equipment stated in this subsection.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-22)
Sec. 10-23. - Technical codes adopted.
As future new editions and/or amendments of the codes listed below are adopted by the state department of community affairs, they
shall become a part of or replacement for the adopted codes, rules and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed
without separate adoption by the governing authority. All new construction, installations, repairs or alterations shall be in conformance with
the current edition of the state minimum standard codes and referenced appendixes with state amendments as currently adopted by the
state department of community affairs:
Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the above-stated codes shall be considered an integral part of the code,
without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by a code test, only those portions of the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
95/227
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be govern.
Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory.
Appendices. The appendices included in any code adopted pursuant to this chapter are not intended for enforcement
unless specifically referenced in this chapter or specifically included in this Code.
Referenced codes and standards. The state codes adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered part of the
requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between the
provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Local
supplemental ordinance requirements to the state-adopted International Residential Code are as follows:
A set of plans that include building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical plans and the site plan as required in this
chapter shall be maintained on the construction site at all times.
A site plan or staking survey prepared and sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be submitted at
the time of the residential footing or slab inspection and prior to the pouring of same. Survey shall show the
setbacks from all property lines. Setbacks shall comply with all minimum zoning ordinance requirements and/or
legally acquired variances.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-23)
Sec. 10-24. - The state energy code adopted.
The state minimum standard energy code is hereby adopted, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community
affairs, and enforcement of said code is directed in accordance with state law.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-24)
Sec. 10-25. - Self inspection.
O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable
within the county.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-25)
Sec. 10-26. - Performance and payment bond for projects over $100,000.00.
A performance and payment bond in the amount of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract is required for any housing
rehabilitation or new housing construction project when the contract exceeds $100,000.00.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(03), § 1-26)
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. - Permitting ocer.
Unless otherwise stated, for purposes of this chapter, the permitting officer is the department, office or individual as designated by the
board of county commissioners who has the responsibility of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's note—
As of the date of adoption of this Code of Ordinances, the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources has been designated by the
board of county commissioners as the permitting officer for the regulations promulgated under this chapter. In addition, the County Code of
Ordinances has another chapter that contains alternative enforcement procedures for this subject matter that parallels those proscribed
under this chapter.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
96/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WETLAND PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-21. - Findings of fact.
Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion
and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and
vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education;
scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is
essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state.
Nationally, a considerable number of wetland resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating,
building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or
destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare.
It is, therefore, necessary for the county to ensure maximum protection for wetlands located in the county by discouraging
development activities that may adversely affect wetlands.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 1.1)
Sec. 14-22. - Title and purpose.
This article shall be known as the "wetland protection ordinance" of the county. The purpose of this article is to promote wetland
protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage
wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of
this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain
and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 1.2)
Sec. 14-23. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Generalized wetland map means a map showing the general locations of wetlands within the unincorporated areas of county. The
generalized wetland map used at the time of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived is the national wetlands
inventory as published by the United States Department of Interior.
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soils conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the soil conservation
service.
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of, or dependent on, saturated soil conditions.
Jurisdictional determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, stating whether a
certain specified site is a wetland or is in a wetland.
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers.
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in section 14-88.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to
support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similarly areas.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
97/227
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an
authority designated by the Corps.
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the county and shown on the generalized wetland map.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 10)
Sec. 14-24. - Amendments.
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and
requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar
to wetlands becomes available.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 7)
Sec. 14-25. - Assessment relief.
The county boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an
undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit
organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall
also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm
sewers and water mains.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 8)
Secs. 14-26—14-53. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WETLAND PROTECTION DISTRICT
Sec. 14-54. - Area established; adoption of wetland map.
This division shall apply to all lands within wetlands located in unincorporated areas of the county. The generalized wetland map,
adopted as part of this article shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near
wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be part of this division. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the board of commissioners of the
county.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 2.1)
Sec. 14-55. - Wetland protection district boundaries.
The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The
purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners that a subject site may be in a jurisdictional wetland or in
proximity to a jurisdictional wetland, requiring the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' guidance as to whether a
section 404 permit will be required prior to initiation of any development activity on the subject site. The generalized wetland map does not
represent precise boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland
boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action
under this division does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 2.2)
Sec. 14-56. - Relationship to zoning.
The wetland protection district is hereby established. the wetland protection district shall comprise an overlay zone that supplements
and is indicated on the county zoning ordinance zoning map, which is hereby incorporated and made part of this division by reference. When
the two ordinances conflict, the more restrictive ordinance shall apply.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
98/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 2.3)
Secs. 14-57—14-85. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
Sec. 14-86. - Local development permit requirements.
No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the permitting officer in the
form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this division
and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in section 14-87 or by other local development ordinances, shall be
prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development appears to be located within 50 feet
of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the permitting officer from review of the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site
and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following receipt by the local
permitting officer of a copy of the section 404 permit or letter of permission issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.1)
Sec. 14-87. - Permissible uses (uses as of right).
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law,
including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein:
Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the
state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit.
Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing.
Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and
as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall, however, be subject to best management
practices approved by the state department of agriculture.
The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that
approved agricultural best management practices are followed.
Education, scientific research and nature trails.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.2)
Sec. 14-88. - Temporary emergency permit.
A temporary, emergency permit can be issued by the permitting officer for the following reasons:
Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide
transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads,
structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and written notice prior to the commencement of work has
been given to the permitting officer, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure
that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired, and that
any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized.
Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations.
Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing
drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided the maintenance or repair activity does not
result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under
the terms and provisions of section 14-87(4).
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
99/227
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks,
management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided such facilities and structures are built
allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.3)
Sec. 14-89. - Site plans.
Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 50 feet, unless a different scale is approved, in advance, by the permitting officer, with the following information:
A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved with cross-sectional
drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the
cross-sectional drawings.
A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other
maps provided by the applicant.
Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site
for a distance of 200 feet.
The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the subject site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream
or water body.
Elevation of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no
greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent.
Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or
toxic materials released accidently.
All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.4)
Sec. 14-90. - Activities to comply with site plan.
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The
site plan may be amended only with approval of the permitting officer. The permitting officer may require additional information deemed
necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this division or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this division.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.5)
Sec. 14-91. - Subdivision approval in the wetland protection district.
Any application for subdivision approval shall include a jurisdictional determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the
Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, subdivision approval will be
issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.6)
Sec. 14-92. - Subdivision design options in the wetland protection district.
Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands shall be allowed and encouraged to use the following options:
Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a means to work around
wetland areas. The permitting officer may allow a reduction in lot size provided the same number of lots in the same
subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area. The maximum permissible reduction shall not exceed 25 percent
of the minimum required lot area. The number of lots with areas reduced shall not exceed 25 percent of the total
number of lots in the subdivision. The permitting officer shall allow no more than a 25 percent adjustment of rear, side
and front setbacks for each affected lot.
Cluster development. Clustering of residential development is encouraged. When considering subdivision approval, the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
100/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
permitting officer will allow incorporation of wetland or other significant natural areas as open space in the subdivision
plan. Such plans should designate at least 25 percent of the gross land area as open space. Density shall be calculated by
subtracting from the total acreage of a parcel, all land dedicated or in use for private or public roads, including all
vehicular rights-of-way. The resultant acreage will then be divided by the minimum allowed lot size of the district to
derive the number of lots permissible.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.7)
Sec. 14-93. - Filing fee.
At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the permitting officer. Filing fees up to the larger of
$1,000.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide
services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the permitting
officer.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.8)
Sec. 14-94. - Enforcement authority.
The permitting officer is the department, office or individual assigned the responsibility of administering this division. The administrative
authority is vested in the office of building inspector.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.9)
Sec. 14-95. - Review procedures.
The application shall be made to the permitting officer and will be reviewed within 60 days. The review period shall begin upon
determination by the permitting officer that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings
(approval, conditional approval or disapproval) by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the
permitting officer. If the review process is not completed within 60 days, the application is considered to be approved.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.10)
Sec. 14-96. - Appeals.
Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the county board of commissioners. The appeal
must be made with ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public
announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to
the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the county board of commissioners may be appealed to the
county superior court.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.11)
Sec. 14-97. - Duration of permit validity.
If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the
permit shall expire.
If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall
expire six months after the date that work ceased.
Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the permitting officer, but no such
notification is required.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 3.12)
Secs. 14-98—14-122. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
101/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 14-123. - Permitting ocer authority.
The permitting officer shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing duties required under this
division, and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary.
The permitting officer shall have authority to enter the subject site to monitor development and to enforce this division;
issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices,
administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be
recovered as damages against the violator.
Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the
permitting officer with enforcement.
The permitting officer shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this division.
Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.1)
Sec. 14-124. - Bond.
The permitting officer may require a bond and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in
the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this division. In the event of a
breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond
and prosecute the same to judgment and execution.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.2)
Sec. 14-125. - Required removal.
When the permitting officer determines a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this division, the violator may
be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the permitting officer.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.3)
Sec. 14-126. - Restoration of vegetation.
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this division, the violator may be required to restore
the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the permitting officer.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.4)
Sec. 14-127. - Notice to EPA.
If the permitting officer discovers a violation of this division that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as
amended, the permitting officer shall issue written notification of the violation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the landowner.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.5)
Sec. 14-128. - Suspension; revocation.
The permitting officer may suspend or revoke a permit if the permitting officer finds the applicant has not complied with the conditions
or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The permitting officer shall cause notice of
denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in
the areas where the wetland is located.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 4.6)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
102/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 14-129. - Penalties
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this division may be fined not more than $1,000.00
for each offense, or up to 60 days in jail. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 5)
Secs. 14-130—14-156. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS
Sec. 14-157. - Jurisdiction.
All final decisions of the county board of commissioners concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit issued pursuant
to the provisions of this division may be appealed to the county superior court.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 6.1)
Sec. 14-158. - Alternative actions.
Based on the proceedings of the county superior court and the decision of said court, the county board of commissioners may, within the
time specified by the court, elect to:
Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's
land;
Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county board of
commissioners.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(01), § 6.2)
Secs. 14-159—14-184. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-185. - Short title.
This article shall be known as the "groundwater recharge area protection ordinance" of the county.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.1)
Sec. 14-186. - Findings of fact.
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate in the county and
surrounding communities, it is essential that public drinking water resources of high quality be ensured. For this reason, it is
necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the county and surrounding communities rely on as sources of
public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions
of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as
groundwater recharge areas.
Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge
areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas to ensure that pollution threats to
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
103/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
water resources are minimized.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.2)
Sec. 14-187. - Objectives.
The objectives of this article are to:
Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas;
Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and
Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no
adverse effect on groundwater quality.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.3(1))
Sec. 14-188. - Penalties
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be punished according to the
general penalties described in section 1-15. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 5)
Sec. 14-189. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district.
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands in unincorporated areas of the county that
are mapped and designated as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.3(2))
Sec. 14-190. - Determination of pollution susceptibility.
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the state pollution
susceptibility map prepared by the state department of natural resources.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.3(3))
Sec. 14-191. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a
well.
Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the
ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer.
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from
dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities.
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources (DNR) that show the relative
susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and
low groundwater pollution potential.
Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is
based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic
structure, presence of karst topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and
potentiometric surfaces.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
104/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 11)
Secs. 14-192—14-220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 14-221. - Compliance required.
No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the permitting officer unless the permit, request and/or
plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in this article.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 1.3(4))
Sec. 14-222. - Enforcement.
The permitting officer, the permitting officer's agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately
owned land for the purpose of performing their assigned duties and responsibilities under this article, and may take or cause
to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary.
The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set
forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article.
In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution.
The permitting officer shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or
threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees
and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator.
Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting
officer in enforcement.
The permitting officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this division.
Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein.
When the permitting officer determines that a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this division, the
violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the permitting officer.
When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to
restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.1)
Sec. 14-223. - Permit review and site plan requirement.
With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in section 14-224, applications for a development permit within the
groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan providing the following information:
A map or maps, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet showing all planned improvements, including the width,
depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways, water lines,
wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant.
Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site.
The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial
stream or water body.
Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet.
Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or
toxic materials released accidentally.
Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades
in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
105/227
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(1)
Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conf
specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater ru
site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a
increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of
appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the permitting officer. Minor chang
realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions a
from this requirement.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.2)
Sec. 14-224. - Exemptions to site plan requirements.
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans:
Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels.
Repair to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development.
Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.3)
Sec. 14-225. - Review procedures.
The application shall be made to the permitting officer and shall be reviewed within 60 days. The review period shall include the
preparation of findings (approval, conditional approval or disapproval) by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification
of the findings of the permitting officer. If the review process is not completed within 60 days, the application is considered to be approved.
Decisions of the permitting officer may be appealed to the county board of commissioners.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.4)
Sec. 14-226. - Public notice and public hearing.
Public notice of permit applications, through publication in the local organ, is required. A public hearing on the application, to be held by
the permitting officer, may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper
of general circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file by the permitting
officer. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the permitting officer may be appealed to the county board of commissioners.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.5)
Sec. 14-227. - Duration of permit validity.
If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of permit issuance,
the permit shall expire.
If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall
expire six months after the date work ceased.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 4.6)
Secs. 14-228—14-247. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION STANDARDS
Sec. 14-248. - Criteria for waste disposal facilities.
For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems.
New agricultural waste impoundments shall meet the following requirements:
For areas of high pollution susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
106/227
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(SCS).
For areas of medium pollution susceptibility, a liner approved by the SCS shall be provided if the site exceeds 15 acrefeet.
For areas of low pollution susceptibility, a liner approved by the SCS shall be provided if the site exceeds 50 acre-feet.
No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area.
For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials, as identified in
section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks,
and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and
leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD), and in
conformance with local fire prevention code requirements.
For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new, aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650
gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tank in a cluster
of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided they comply with
applicable federal regulations.
For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by
EPD.
For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed.
For high pollution susceptibility areas, the use of wastewater spray irrigation systems and the land application of
wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with the department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land
treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land application
of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit
from EPD.
Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. Construction of new homes to be served by septic tank/drain systems shall not
commerce until such time as the required building permit has been issued, and the proposed septic tank installation has
been approved by the county health department in conformance with minimum lot size requirements.
Secs. 14-249—14-274. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - APPEALS, AMENDMENTS, AND ASSESSMENT RELIEF
Sec. 14-275. - Jurisdiction.
All final decisions of the county board of commissioners concerning approval, conditional approval or denial of a permit shall be
reviewable in the county superior court.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 7.1)
Sec. 14-276. - Alternative actions.
Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the county board of commissioners may, within the time specified by the
court, elect to:
Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's
land;
Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or
Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the county board of
commissioners.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 7.2)
Sec. 14-277. - Amendments.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
107/227
(a)
(b)
These regulations may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as
new information becomes available.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 8)
Sec. 14-278. - Assessment relief.
The county board of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(02), § 9)
Secs. 14-279—14-304. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 14-305. - Findings and purpose.
The state has determined river corridors are of vital importance to the quality of life in the state in that they help preserve
those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water.
River corridors are fragile natural resources subject to flood, erosion, soil-bearing capacity limitation, and other natural and
human induced hazards. In their natural state they serve multiple functions, including pollution control, aquifer recharge and
discharge, storage and passage of flood water, erosion and sedimentation control, as well as wildlife habitat, education,
scientific study, open space and recreation, and scenic and aesthetic beauty.
The state's Comprehensive Planning Act of 1989 provided for coordinated and comprehensive planning by municipal and
county governments, including consideration for the natural resources, environments, and vital areas within their jurisdictions.
The O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 authorized the department of natural resources to develop minimum planning standards and
procedures for the protection of river corridors in the state, and requires local governments to use these minimum standards
in developing and implementing local comprehensive plans. The method mandated in O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 for protecting river
corridors is establishment of a natural vegetative buffer bordering each protected river. In 1993, the county developed a river
corridor protection plan, as authorized in O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, to maintain the integrity of the Flint River.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 1.1)
Sec. 14-306. - Title; purpose.
This article shall be known as the "river corridor protection ordinance" of the county. The purposes of this article are to provide for
protection of the river corridor by regulating activities in or adjacent to the corridor; provide for the powers and duties of the county; provide
goals, guidelines, practices, procedures, policies, rules, and regulations; provide minimum standards for regulated activities within the river
corridor; provide for a review of decision; provide for hearings and judicial review; provide for enforcement; prohibit certain activities or
actions; provide for civil and other penalties; repeal conflicting ordinances; and other purposes.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 1.2)
Sec. 14-307. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Buffer or buffer area: See River corridor.
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan for Macon County, and as may be amended.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
108/227
(1)
(2)
Contaminant means any "regulated substance," as defined by the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as in effect on the
date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived and as amended from time to time, and all petroleum products, including
gasoline, oil, waste oils, and other fuels as well as their hazardous constituents.
Hazardous material means any "contaminant," as defined in this article, and any hazardous chemical for which a material safety data
sheet must be filed in 42 USC 11021 and 11022.
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator
of the United States Environment Protection Agency according to federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40
CFR 261.3.
Land-disturbing activity means any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction,
rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. The term "land-disturbing activity" does not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and
landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family
dwelling, or the cutting of firewood for personal use.
Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific
areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, The Natural Environments of Georgia. Habitats for endangered and threatened
species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species.
Perennial river means a river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year.
Person means any individual, group of individuals, association, firm, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, organization, or legal entity of
any kind, including municipal corporations, government agencies, or subdivisions thereof.
Protected river means any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as
determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. By this definition, the Flint River in the county is a protected river.
Public utility or utilities means a service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or
services and including all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services.
River bank means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course
of flow.
River corridor means all land, including islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., or
the Coastal Marshland Protection Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280 through 12-5-293, in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet
horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks.
The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break
in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot-wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of
the river water shall be treated in the same manner as the river corridor.
Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of
channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purpose of this article, the river corridor shall be considered to be
fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the local comprehensive plan as established by the
department of community affairs. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the start of the review period will
require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next review by the department of community
affairs.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 10)
Sec. 14-308. - Appeal.
Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the county board of commissioners. The appeal
must be made with ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public
announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
109/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the county board of commissioners may be appealed to the
county superior court.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 11)
Sec. 14-309. - Penalties.
Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be punished according to the
general penalties described in section 1-15. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 7.1)
Sec. 14-310. - Applicability.
The standards and procedures detailed in this article shall be applicable throughout unincorporated areas of the county as of and after
the date set forth herein.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 2)
Sec. 14-311. - Protection criteria.
A natural, vegetative buffer 100 feet wide and parallel to the Flint River shall be maintained adjacent to the river except as may
otherwise provided herein.
Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the river corridor, except as provided in section 14-341
The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the river
corridor.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 3)
Secs. 14-312—14-340. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE RIVER CORRIDOR
Sec. 14-341. - Permitted activities.
The following uses and activities are permitted within the river corridor:
Detached single-family dwellings and customary appurtenances shall be permitted within the corridor subject to the
following conditions:
The dwelling and its customary appurtenances shall comply with all local building codes, zoning regulations and any
other applicable, local regulations.
The dwelling must be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. No portion of the required minimum
acreage shall be located between the river bank and water's edge.
Only one dwelling is permitted on each two acre or larger tract.
Septic tank or tanks serving only detached, single-family dwellings may be located within the corridor; however,
septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the corridor.
Construction of road crossings and utility crossings within the river corridor shall be permitted, provided construction
meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, as amended, and any applicable local
ordinances pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control.
Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is
derived are exempt from the protection criteria of this division, except as provided in this article, provided that:
Said use of the river corridor does not impair the drinking quality of the river water;
Activity within the river corridor meets all state and federal environmental rules and regulations.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
110/227
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
1.
2.
3.
4.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
Timber production and harvesting provided the activity is consistent with the Georgia forestry commission's best
management practices, and the activity does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the
Clean Water Act, as amended;
Wildlife and fisheries management activities are consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8;
Wastewater treatment;
Recreational usage is consistent with either the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent
recreation;
Natural water quality treatment or purification;
Agricultural production and management provided:
The activity is consistent with the state soil and water conservation commission's best management practices;
The activity does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Clean Water Act, as
amended;
The activity is consistent with all other state and federal laws and state department of agriculture regulations;
Other uses permitted by the state department of natural resource or section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 4)
Sec. 14-342. - Prohibited activities.
The following uses and activities are prohibited within the river corridor:
Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills, and construction and demolition (C&D) landfills.
Commercial or industrial uses that involve handling hazardous materials other than wastes.
Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous wastes.
Construction within the river corridor is prohibited with the exception of those activities permitted in this article.
Surface mining activities.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 5)
Sec. 14-343. - Previously existing uses.
Any land use or land-disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which falls within one
of the following categories prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, is exempt from the requirement of
this division:
Is completed;
Is under construction;
Is fully approved by the county;
All materials have been submitted for approval by the county; or
Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in
accordance with such zoning.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 8)
Secs. 14-344—14-374. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS
Sec. 14-375. - Required; issuance.
All persons desiring to undertake a permitted activity within a river corridor as mapped by the appropriate state and federal
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
111/227
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
agencies must first obtain a permit from the permitting officer. Permit applications shall be filed at the Office of Building
Inspector, Sumter Street, Oglethorpe, Georgia, 31068.
Permits shall be issued only if the activity is in compliance with county regulations and other applicable state, federal, and local
regulations. The permitting officer, as an agent for the county, shall impose conditions on any permit necessary to ensure that
any adverse impacts upon the functions and values of the river corridor are prevented or kept to a minimum.
If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of permit issuance,
the permit shall expire.
If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall
expire six months after the date work ceased.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 6)
Secs. 14-376—14-393. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCES
Sec. 14-394. - Granting and approval process.
A variance may be approved if such approval is not contrary to the public interest and where, because of the special characteristics of the
property and/or the activity, a literal enforcement of provisions of this article will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship.
However, the spirit of this division must be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided that the
variance, if granted, will not result in damage to the river corridor.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.1)
Sec. 14-395. - Procedure.
Application for variance shall be filed with the permitting officer; such application must be filed 30 days before the date of the next
county commissioner meeting in order that the required public notice may be given before the next scheduled meeting. Each application
shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following:
General location of the proposed structure as well as existing structures;
Location in relation to river corridor;
Such other data as needed for determination of variance.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.2)
Sec. 14-396. - Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners for the review of an application for a variance. Notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published at least 15 days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.2.1)
Sec. 14-397. - Fee.
Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by the county board of
commissioners to partially defray administrative costs.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.2.2)
Sec. 14-398. - Conditions and limitations.
The board of commissioners shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent
properties and to carry out the provisions of this resolution.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
112/227
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.2.3)
Sec. 14-399. - Standard for review.
The application of this article to the particular property will result in unnecessary hardship; and:
It is proven to the satisfaction of the permitting officer that no damage to the river corridor will result from the requested
activity; and
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this
article.
(Ord. of 2-18-1999(03), § 9.2.4)
Secs. 14-400—14-426. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE
Sec. 14-427. - Purpose.
Macon County (hereinafter the county) recognizes an imminent need to create a culture of water conservation and to plan for
water supply enhancement during future/extreme drought conditions and other water emergencies.
Reasonable restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape are necessary to address this in furtherance of addressing this
need.
The general assembly has required all counties to adopt an ordinance to be in effect no later than January 1, 2011, to allow
outdoor watering of landscape to between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (with certain exceptions).
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7, the board of commissioners have prepared an ordinance to address outdoor watering of
landscape.
(Ord. of 11-18-2010, preamble)
Sec. 14-428. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape.
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the
unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create
any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses:
Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial
production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine,
hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens,
ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural,
dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state
guidelines;
Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations;
Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of
the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water;
Watering personal food gardens;
Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and
for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or a handheld container;
Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
113/227
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
(2)
(3)
surface water is on said property;
Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
Hydroseeding.
(Ord. of 11-18-2010, § 1)
Sec. 14-429. - Enforcement.
No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article.
The code enforcement officer shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may authorize other
departments and employees as deemed necessary to support enforcement.
Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to
the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code.
(Ord. of 11-18-2010, § 2)
Secs. 14-430—14-456. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - TIMBER HARVESTING
Sec. 14-457. - Requirements.
Any individual, partnership, corporation or any other entity (hereinafter called the harvester) who harvests standing timber in any
unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located
inside or outside this state will be required to perform the following:
The harvester must fill out an application with the county building inspector, the designated agent of the board of
commissioners, within 48 hours (excepting weekends and legal holidays), after start-up (moving in of equipment or
cutting of any trees). The application form shall be as prescribed by the commissioners and shall agree with the form
prescribed by the director (state forestry commission form 12-6-24) and contain the following information:
The name, address and phone number of the harvester.
The name, address and phone number of the owner of the property where the timber is to be harvested.
The location of the property on which the harvesting operation will be located along with an attached map showing
the main point of ingress from a public road and the main point of egress to a public road if different. All points of
ingress and egress are subject to the approval of the county road superintendent.
The roads in the county upon which motor vehicles will travel transporting the harvested timber.
The date cutting operations are expected to commence and end.
The harvester shall post a cash bond, surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit as provided for in this subsection, in the
amount of $5,000.00, payable to the county. The purpose of the bond is to insure that all damages to roadways, ditches,
or rights-of-way are corrected and said areas left at least in the same condition as existing immediately prior to the
operations start-up. A separate bond must be furnished for each harvesting operation in the county. Notice shall not be
or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered
to the governing authority or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to
transact business in this state, protecting the county against any damage cause by harvester. However, at the option of
harvester, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 7-
1-4 in the amount of $5,000.00 may be provided in lieu of bond.
Before issuance of a permit, the county road superintendent shall inspect the site to determine if a culvert (size and
length) is necessary. If deemed necessary, it shall be the option of the harvester to either install the driveway and any
drainage pipes of appropriate specifications as determined by the road superintendent or request the county to install
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
114/227
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
said driveway at the expense of the harvester. Also, when the site is inspected by the road superintendent, the existing
conditions of roads and public property shall be documented. The road superintendent and the harvester are required to
sign documentation form.
No equipment, trucks, or trailers used in connection with timber harvesting shall be left unattended or parked on any
county right-of-way or public property. Harvesters shall not damage county roads and shall take appropriate action to
ensure all trucks hauling timber do not exceed load limits for county roads being used.
A minimum of four warning signs, two in each direction of the road entrance to the timber operation. Two signs, one in
each direction, shall be located 500 feet in each direction from the entrance and shall state: "Slow Truck Entering
Highway." Two signs, one in each direction, shall be located 1,000 feet from the entrance and shall state: "Warning:
Logging Operation Ahead." Each of the four signs shall be 36 inches by 36 inches, orange in color, and shall be posted at
least three feet from the travel surface of the roadway.
The harvester shall give the county written notice of completion within 72 hours of such. Within five days of such notice,
the county shall inspect the county roads and public property used by the harvester to determine if the property has
been returned to a condition that is at least equal to that prior to harvest. If it is determined that roads and property are
not in a proper state of condition, the county shall provide written notice to the timber harvester specifying the action
which will have to be performed to correct said conditions. The harvester shall have 15 days from notification to
complete said repairs. If the necessary repairs are not completed within the given time period, or if the repairs are not
made in accordance with applicable standards which are acceptable to the county, the county may proceed to remedy
said defects using the proceeds from any surety bond to pay for such work. Any portion of a surety bond that is not
required or used shall be repaid to the permit holder. Any harvester who does not take appropriate action to remedy the
problem shall pay all cost incurred by the county to repair any problems and return the property to as good condition as
previously existed. In this case, the county may use its own personnel, and/or enter into such contracts with independent
contractors as it deems necessary to rectify the problem.
The harvester shall notify the county tax assessors' office of actual completion date on each site.
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-2011)
Sec. 14-458. - Operating restrictions on roads and access sites; authority to close or cease operations.
All operations shall be conducted at a loading site off the county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county
roads.
Loading or skidding of logs will not be permitted on county roads.
Ditches shall be kept clear of all debris or residue at all times to allow for proper drainage.
County roads at the access site shall be kept serviceable at all times for the passing public, emergency vehicles, school buses,
mail carriers, etc.
No logging trucks can use roads in the county during periods of significant rain. Written notice shall be given to owners of
trucks to cease using roads in the county for a specific period of time during inclement weather conditions. If an owner or
operator continues to use any road, that person shall be in violation of this article.
The county road superintendent has the authority to close down all operations when it is determined that the county roads
and access sites are not being properly maintained. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the person or persons
in charge of the activity at the harvesting site and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. When an
emergency exists, the sheriff is authorized to stop work with no written notice.
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 2, 3-1-2011)
Sec. 14-459. - Penalties.
Any harvester who shall willfully fail to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the
magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to section 1-15. Each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offence.
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 3, 3-1-2011)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
115/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 14-460. - Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the county code enforcement officer. Citations for violations shall require an appearance before the
magistrate court of the county.
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 4, 3-1-2011)
Chapter 18 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. - Authorization.
Georgia Constitution Article IX, Section II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 1, § A)
Sec. 18-2. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages,
carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is
connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is
separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the county manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate,
and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the federal emergency management agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be
those designated by the local community and referenced in section 18-7.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-
A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling
or exceeding that level in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase
the hazard to life and health. The term "critical facilities" includes:
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials;
Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be
sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events;
Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
116/227
(4)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
inoperative during flood and storm events; and
Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground
level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before
April 3, 1996 (the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community).
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 6, 1996 (the effective date of the
first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community).
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the
boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the
areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study means the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood
profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected
size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed
foundation of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
117/227
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Mean seal level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations
within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced
after April 3, 1996, (the effective date of the initial FIRM) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after February 6, 1996,
(the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after February 6, 1996 (the effective date of the first
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community).
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood
Modernization Maps.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
118/227
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
(a)
(b)
property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main
structure). (Note—accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement.
The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure
should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or, in the case of
damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the
purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include:
Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified
by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 6)
Sec. 18-3. - Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and
protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 1, § B)
Sec. 18-4. - Statement of purpose.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
119/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at
the time of initial construction;
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands; and
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 1, § C)
Sec. 18-5. - Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets
and bridges located in floodplains;
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner
as to minimize flood blight areas,
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 1, § D)
Sec. 18-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Macon County, Georgia.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § A)
Sec. 18-7. - Basis for area of special ood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS),
dated August 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter.
For those land areas acquired by a county through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 18, 2009, with
accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby adopted by reference.
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard
engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is
located: Macon County Courthouse, 121 S. Sumter Street, Oglethorpe, Georgia 31068.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § B)
Sec. 18-8. - Establishment of development permit.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
120/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § C)
Sec. 18-9. - Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § D)
Sec. 18-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § E)
Sec. 18-11. - Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the board of county commissioners; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § F)
Sec. 18-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § G)
Sec. 18-13. - Penalties for violation.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than five days, or
both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county board of commissioners from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 2, § H)
Secs. 18-14—18-44. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 18-45. - Designation of chapter administrator.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
121/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
a.
b.
c.
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
The county manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 3, § A)
Sec. 18-46. - Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county manager on forms furnished by the community prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the
area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or
equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
Application stage.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential
floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of 18-69(2); and
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed
development.
Construction stage.
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an asbuilt certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When
floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The county manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 3, § B)
Sec. 18-47. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the county manager shall include, but not be limited to:
Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies
from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334 and require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file.
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-7, obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in
order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter.
Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 18-46(2)c.
Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-46(b).
When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
122/227
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11
(12)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
(5)
engineer or architect in accordance with section 18-46(1)c and sections 18-69 and 18-71
Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in
flood hazard areas.
Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure
accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process.
Ensure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained.
Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this article.
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the county manager and shall be
open for public inspection.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 3, § C)
Secs. 18-48—18-67. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 18-68. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure;
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage;
New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed
area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater:
The design for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit
the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction.
So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be
used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or
entry to the elevated area; and
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms;
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
123/227
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(3)
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
1.
2.
c.
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may inclu
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with app
requirements for resisting wind forces;
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwater;
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding; and
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this
article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § A)
Sec. 18-69. - Specic standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
New construction and/or substantial improvements.
Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or
manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with
standards of section 18-68(4), elevated buildings.
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation.
Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE,
or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide
such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 18-47
Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available:
All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on:
Individual lots or parcels;
In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred
substantial damage as the result of a flood;
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation.
Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
may be elevated so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base
flood elevation; or
The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements
of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference section 18-68(6).)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
124/227
d.
1.
2.
3.
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on
its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or
Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of
subsection (3)(a) and(c) of this section.
Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 are areas designated as floodways. A
floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the
area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood
heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other
development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A
registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof.
Only if subsection (4)(a) of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall
comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § B)
Sec. 18-70. - Building standards for streams without established base ood elevations and/or oodway (A-zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been
provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided, but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply:
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-7, then the
county manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are
not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply.
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream
or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of
existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than
three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot
above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of
section 18-68(4), elevated buildings.
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and
other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site.
The county manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the
permit file.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § C)
Sec. 18-71. - Standards for areas of shallow ooding (zones AE) with established base ood elevations without designated oodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but
no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
125/227
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of speci
unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the propos
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface eleva
flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technica
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in
accordance with section 18-69
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § D)
Sec. 18-72. - Standards for areas of shallow ooding (AO zones).
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood
depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above
the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated
at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 18-68(4), elevated buildings. The county manager
shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file.
New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation.
The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified
FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to
the official as set forth above and as required in section 18-46(1)c and (2).
Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § E)
Sec. 18-73. - Standards for subdivisions.
The following standards shall apply to subdivisions:
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall
be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions.
Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review
as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is
applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order
to obtain the final LOMR.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § F)
Sec. 18-74. - Standards for critical facilities.
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
126/227
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(i)
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 4, § G)
Secs. 18-75—18-91. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES
Sec. 18-92. - Zoning board to hear and decide appeals or variances.
The county zoning board as established by the county board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or
variance from the requirements of this chapter.
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by
the county manager in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county manager may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as
provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of
this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
In reviewing such request, the county zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards
specified in this and other sections of this chapter.
Conditions for variances.
A variance shall be issued only when there is:
A finding of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the
standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the
building.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base
flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
The county shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the county zoning board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009, art. 5)
Chapter 22 - MANUFACTURED HOMES
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
127/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Standards and requirements for installation, and licensing of manufactured homes and mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-
110 et seq.; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.
Sec. 22-1. - Minimum health and safety standards for pre-owned manufactured homes.
The general assembly of the state has declared that no county shall impose any health or safety standards or conditions based
upon the age of a manufactured home.
Under authority of the state constitution and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-170 et seq., a county may establish standards, conditions, and an
inspection program for pre-owned manufactured homes which are relocated.
Promotion and maintenance of property values within the jurisdiction and the health and general welfare of the citizens of the
county are furthered when standards for the condition of structures, including pre-owned manufactured homes, are
established and enforced.
All manufactured homes relocated to or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, preamble, 3-17-2011)
Sec. 22-2. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of the county.
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections;
the county building official or any assistants to the county building official.
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in
compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this chapter, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy.
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by section 22-4 reasonably
portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash
deposit may be deposited with the county.
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. The term "install"
includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or
expandable sections of such manufactured home.
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of Macon County, Georgia.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight-body feet or more in
width or 40 body-feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" includes any
structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been
titled.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 1, 3-17-2011)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
128/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sec. 22-3. - Conditions.
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in
accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 2, 3-17-2011)
Sec. 22-4. - Permitting, inspection, certicate of occupancy and fees.
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. All permits shall be issued upon receipt of all
items listed in subsection (1)(a) through (d) of this section.
Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector:
An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards
required by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
(the HUD Code);
Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home
meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 22-5
A $500.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $500.00 refundable cash deposit; and
The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (4) of this section.
Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the
purposes of inspection. The applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured
home is complete.
Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building
inspector certifies that the requirements of this section have been met.
Fee. A permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the county to process the permit
application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up
inspection. The applicant shall be charged for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. The amounts
of the permit and inspection fee and the follow-up inspection fee shall be as established by the board of county
commissioners from time to time.
Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at such building inspector's discretion,
inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within
the county.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 3, 3-17-2011)
Sec. 22-5. - Compliance to minimum health and safety standards.
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building
inspector:
HUD code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401—5445 (the HUD code) and shall not have
been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD code.
Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition.
Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound
condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration.
Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers
and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces.
The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might
admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
129/227
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
a.
b.
c.
1.
2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary w
when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathr
contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures
checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition.
Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited.
Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall
be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required
breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be
subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bounded.
Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition.
Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to
allow egress if necessary.
Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device.
Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in
each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
Entrances. All entrances (doors) must have steps with landings and hand rails within 30 days of power being turned on.
Landings must be no less than three feet by three feet. The minimum width of any stair serving as a means of egress
shall be a minimum of 36 inches. The width of the landing shall not be less that the width of stairways they serve. All
steps and landing must have proper hand and guard railing where required. No loose block steps will be allowed.
Skirting. To be installed within 30 days after the power inspection of the manufactured home. Clothes dryer exhaust
vents and a/c condensation drain must extend through the skirting. A minimum of four ventilation openings are required.
The minimum ventilation shall be 1/1,500 of the area of the crawl space.
Floor zone requirements. Only for manufactured or mobile homes located in the flood zone:
Concrete footings. Pour concrete footings a minimum of 16 inches by 16 inches wide and six inches deep.
Piers. Piers must have mortar joints or sure wall (not stacked).
Height of home.
With base flood elevation. First floor at its finished level two feet above base flood elevation or anything that
penetrates the finished floor two feet above based floor (example: HVAC duct work). Outside electrical
equipment raised to first-floor level (HVAC unit). Certified surveyor has to determine the base flood elevations.
Without base flood elevation. First floor finished level three feet above highest point of the property where the
manufactured or mobile home will be set-up. Elevation certificate must be provided by a surveyor.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 4, 3-17-2011)
Sec. 22-6. - Enforcement.
Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy.
Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked
and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense.
The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all
conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building
inspector.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 5, 3-17-2011)
Sec. 22-7. - Penalties.
Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be
punishable according to the section 1-15. Each day any violation under this chapter continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2011-2, § 6, 3-17-2011)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
130/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; municipal authority to require by ordinance the repair, closing, or
demolition of unfit dwellings or other unfit structures intended for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - UNINHABITABLE HOUSES AND STRUCTURES
Sec. 26-19. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of
record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and
trustees.
Public officer means the building inspector and any other officer who is authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by
such article, any agent of such officers, and any officer appointed by the board of commissioners for purposes of this article.
Uninhabitable structure means a structure which the building inspector deems to be not fit for human habitation or use by any persons
for the purpose for which it was constructed.
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 (Nuisances—Definition in general) and 41-2-8 (Nuisances—Abatement of
Nuisances Generally—Definition), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All
words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the
respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8, and shall have the same scope and effect that the
same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 and 41-2-8.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 1.1)
Sec. 26-20. - Duty of owner.
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the county to construct and maintain such dwelling,
building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county, or such ordinances which regulate and
prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or
property in violation of such codes or ordinances.
Sec. 26-21. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances.
All structures and/or the surrounding premises of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this article are
hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer
shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as "unsafe for human habitation" as set forth in this article.
If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the code enforcement officer shall
request an immediate hearing before the judge of the municipal court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of
the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this article.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 2.1)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
131/227
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Sec. 26-22. - Findings and applicability.
It is found and declared that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or
for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or
structures unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
the residents of this county, and that this county should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish such dwellings,
buildings or structures in the manner provided in this article.
All the provisions of this article, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where an
accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions create a public health hazard or a general
nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building
inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation
of this article.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 3.1)
Sec. 26-23. - Construction of article.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce
any provisions of its Charter or its ordinances or regulations, or to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article
shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 4.1)
Sec. 26-24. - Authority to use revenues, grants and donations.
The county may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply for grants or
donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 5.1)
Sec. 26-25. - Taking by eminent domain; police power.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such
property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state or as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in
accordance with the police power of this state.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 6.1)
Sec. 26-26. - Powers of public ocer.
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions
of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this article:
Investigation of the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures
therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use;
Administration of oaths and affirmations, examination of witnesses, and receipt of evidence;
Entering upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in
such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
Appointment of and fixing the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as the public officer deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this article; and
Delegation of any of the public officer's functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as the public
officer may designate.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 7.1)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
132/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 26-27. - Determination by public ocer of untness.
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial,
industrial or business use if the public officer finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings,
buildings or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions may include the following without limiting the generality of the
foregoing:
Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
Dilapidation;
Disrepair;
Structural defects;
Uncleanliness;
The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the
structure or the population of the surrounding area;
Due to their unsafe condition, the supporting structure and/or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be
replaced;
The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads, or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their
present or intended use;
The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety of the health of the structure's
occupants or of the people of the county; and
Conditions which may be detrimental to the public health, safety and/or welfare whether found in a structure or on the
premises surrounding the structure, including, but not limited to, abandoned walls, shafts, basements or excavations,
abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or
vegetation or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 8.1)
Sec. 26-28. - Correction procedure.
Filing of complaint; hearing. Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents
of the county charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or
business use, or whenever it appears to the public officer on the public officer's own motion that any dwelling, building,
structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in
compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes
an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall, if such
officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of
real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance
exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building,
or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map
reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the
action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a
hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and
at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45
days after filing of said complaint in the proper court; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint.
Issuance of order. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under
consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
133/227
(1)
(2)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(d)
(1)
(2)
compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes
an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served, upon the owner and/or interested
parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order:
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in
relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the
time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full
compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it
cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with
applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of
the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to
remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property.
In no event shall the county board of commissioners require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except
upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or
structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article.
Repair or demolition by county.
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to repair, vacate and close, or demolish the dwelling,
building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved
or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration
of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable
codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public
health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for
commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful."
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer
may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the
public officer set forth in this section and in this subsection shall not be exercised until the board of commissioners have
by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular
property which the public officer has found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial
or business use, which property shall be described in the ordinance.
Costs become lien.
The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against
the real property upon which cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified
copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where
the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A.
§ 41-2-12(c). The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be
inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the
public officer, such public officer shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings or structure and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
superior court of the county by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and
shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. The public officer and board
of county commissioners are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such
materials salvaged from such dwellings, buildings or structure, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged
materials.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
134/227
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Collection of amount due on lien. The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolitio
dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner:
The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county within 30
days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying
to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in
three equal annual payments, each of which shall be due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment
made as prescribed in this subsection.
Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in
interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be
due and payable to the county.
Should the amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon
the occurrence of the contingency provided for under this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount
due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as
provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of
redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. title
48, chapter 4, article 3 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-220 et seq.).
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 9.1)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9.
Sec. 26-29. - Service of complaints and orders upon parties in interest and owners.
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in
possession of the property, each owner and each party in interest. The return of service signed by the public officer or agent or
an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon
each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the
place of residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner and party in interest.
At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or
statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably
ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the
occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at
least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing.
If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the county, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such
complaint or orders to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such
party or such service may be made by any citizen. The return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen
that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be
conclusive as to such service.
Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the complaint or orders once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the county or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the
county and circulated in the county in which the dwellings, buildings or structures are located. A copy of such complaint or
orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such
nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail.
If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or
other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside
the county or is a nonresident, such guardian or personal representative shall be served as provided in this section in such
cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or if
such minor or insane person lives outside of the county or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or
insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
135/227
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the county or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by
serving the judge of the probate court of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or
insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person.
If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise
of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or orders
upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected
upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved.
A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county, and
such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
(Ord. of 12-5-2000, § 10.1)
Secs. 26-30—26-46. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - NOISE
Sec. 26-47. - Purpose.
The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noises within unincorporated areas of the county is a
condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing.
The making, creation, or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises which are
prolonged, unusual, and unnatural at their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of unincorporated areas of the county.
The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is so declared as
matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, and the peace and quiet of unincorporated areas of the county and its inhabitants;
(Ord. No. 09-190309, exh. A(preamble), 3-19-2009)
Sec. 26-48. - Excessive, unnecessary, and unusually loud noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud
noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within
unincorporated areas of the county. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in
violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or
other vehicle on any street or public place within the county, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated
by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine, or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building,
structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
Loud speakers, amplifiers. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is heard upon the public streets for the purpose of attracting the attention of
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
136/227
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
the public to any building or structure.
Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in
any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper county
authorities.
Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such other
manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading
any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to
exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or
less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not
be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways
within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if the building inspector shall further determine that loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the building inspector may grant permission for such work to be
done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during the progress of the work.
Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution
of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street.
Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to
any performance, show, or sale.
Metal rails, pillars, and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or
other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so
loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual
noise, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the
building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the operation of any pile
driver, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if the building inspector
shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the building inspector may grant
permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the
time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
137/227
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled
and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
(Ord. No. 09-190309, exh. A, § 1-1, 3-19-2009)
Sec. 26-49. - Application for special permit.
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made
to the county manager. Any permit granted by the county manager hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said
permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The county manager may grant
the relief as applied for if they find:
That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity or operation to comply with this article;
The activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply
with other subsections of this section; or
That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
The county manager may prescribe any conditions or requirements the county manager deems necessary to minimize the
adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
Any decision denying or modifying any special permit granted under this section shall be made in writing and given to the
applicant within five business days after submission of the application. The applicant may appeal any adverse decision to the
county commission, provided the appeal is in writing and filed with the county clerk within ten days from the receipt of the
denial.
(Ord. No. 09-190309, exh. A, § 1-2, 3-19-2009)
Sec. 26-50. - Violation a misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-15. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided hereunder.
(Ord. No. 09-190309, exh. A, § 1-3, 3-19-2009)
Chapter 30 - ROADS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of
traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1
et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; county road systems,
O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ROAD ADDRESSING
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 30-19. - Denitions.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
138/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Address program administrator means the official of the county charged with the administration of this article, including such official's
authorized representative. The building inspector, or such person as may be designated by the board of commissioners, shall serve as the
address program administrator.
Address program administrator assistant means the official of the county charged with assisting the address program administrator. The
address program administrator assistant shall be the county clerk of the board of commissioners or such other person as designated by the
board of commissioners.
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter of persons for residential or business use. When
separated by division walls from the ground up without openings, each such enclosure may be deemed a separate building. Buildings without
divisions, as described in this article, that are used as multifamily or multiuse facilities may, at the discretion of the address program
administrator, be assigned more than one address.
Concurrence. The board shall have the right to disapprove any action of the address program administrator by a majority vote. If the
board of commissioners shall fail to act within two regular meetings after the action of the address program administrator, the board of
commissioners shall be deemed to have concurred with the action.
Driveway means a private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-ofway, and leading to a building, lot or physical location.
Private road means any one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress, serving two or more properties, but not for use by the
general public.
Public road means any road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or other way of passage that has been irrevocably dedicated to the public or
in which the public has acquired rights by prescription, without regard to whether it is open for travel.
Road address means the combination of numbers and road names assigned under the terms of this article which identifies a particular
building, lot or other physical location.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-20. - Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide a uniform system of assigning addresses for all properties and buildings throughout
the county in order to facilitate provision of adequate public safety and emergency response service, and to minimize difficulty in locating
properties and buildings for public service agencies and the general public.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Secs. 30-21—30-43. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION
Sec. 30-44. - Duties and interpretation.
The address program administrator and program assistant, with concurrence of the board of commissioners, will be responsible for
interpretation and administration of this article including:
Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings.
Maintaining a database of addresses of each property and building.
Designation of individual unit addresses within multiple-housing units in conformity with this article.
Recommending to the board of commissioners such changes to this article or to the road name system as may be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
139/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
necessary to facilitate the perpetuation and efficiency of the address system.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-45. - Enforcement.
Owners or occupants already constructed which do not comply with this article will be notified and requested to meet the
requirements within 60 days from the date of notification. A warning notice will be issued by registered or certified mail after
the 60 days if the requirements have not been met. The owner or occupant who does not comply with this article within 30
days after delivery of a warning notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished.
Violation of this article may also be enforced by seeking an order to compel compliance of civil remedies against the violators.
Prosecution for violation of this article shall be upon citation, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, in the
magistrate court of the county. Any person, business, establishment, congregation, group, hunting camp or other legal entity
violating this article may be given a summons and tried in magistrate court of the county.
Upon conviction, said person shall be fined a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00; and sentenced to a jail
term of not more than 90 days in jail, either or both, or any part thereof.
The address program administrator is authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions contained within this
article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Secs. 30-46—30-63. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - NUMBERING
Sec. 30-64. - Display of road address numbers.
Each location noted on the master address list for E911 shall be required to purchase an address sign as described herein. The county
shall bill the residents or owner of the business for each sign installed. The amount charged for the address sign shall be as established by
the board of county commissioners from time to time. The sign shall be installed on a metal post and metal sign with the display of official
reflective address numbers so that they are clearly visible from the street or road on which the driveway to the property is. No other signs will
be allowed to be displayed. The following criteria shall be used to properly display the numbers:
Address numbers must meet the minimum size requirements indicated as follows:
Posts upon which they are mounted must bear reflective letters three inches in height.
Residences and businesses in unincorporated areas of the county must place posts bearing a blue sign with white
reflective address numbers three inches in height, and in immediate proximity to the driveway or private road that
leads to such residence or business.
Numbers for a multiple dwelling complex or nonresidential building shall be three inches in height and shall be placed on
a post. Individual units within a multiple dwelling complex shall be required to display a unit reflective number, which is
three inches in height on the front door or immediately adjacent to the door.
On a corner lot, the house number shall face the street named in the address.
The address program administrator and program assistant, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, will
have the right to authorize and approve alternate methods of displaying numbers which meet the intent of this article
when strict adherence to these standards cannot be met or is impractical.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-65. - Types of numbers.
The following two types of numbers are to be used under this article:
A primary number is to be assigned to each street frontage of each improved property. The primary number must be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
140/227
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
posted on that property if the property is occupied by a dwelling unit, structure, or active use; and the owner, occupant
or person in charge is notified.
Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures and uses coexist on the same parcel of land.
Examples of secondary numbers include apartment projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit
developments, recreational vehicle parks, recreational areas, shopping centers and other uses where the use of
secondary numbers would clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers,
the address program administrator shall work with the owner, manager or person in charge of the project to determine a
logical numbering system.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Secs. 30-66—30-88. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - DESIGNATION OF ROADS
Sec. 30-89. - Exempt and excluded structures.
The intent of this section is to exclude from this article those structures that do not present a significant danger to human life
if destroyed by fire or other events.
The following structures shall be excluded from the provision of this article:
Agricultural buildings not requiring a separate mailing address, such as a barn, poultry house, outbuilding, or equipment
storage building.
Storage and accessory building for the use of the occupant of another building on the same property. Buildings used as
dwelling units, offices, or the nominal workstation of an employee, or such building that requires a separate mailing
address, shall be exempt.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-90. - New road names.
No new public roads in the unincorporated area of the county shall be named without the approval of the board of
commissioners.
No private road names shall be recognized by this article or added to the county's list of road names without the approval of
the board of commissioners.
The name of any public and/or private road shall not duplicate or be confusingly similar to an existing road name. This
restriction shall not apply to extensions of existing roads.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-91. - Numbers for future structures and lots.
All utility services regulated by the state public service commissioner or any utility cooperative service organization providing service in
the unincorporated area of the county shall withhold service from any building, dwelling, mobile home or other structure not exempt under
this article until the owner or other requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid, assigned number.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
Sec. 30-92. - Implementation by county departments.
Every department and official under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners shall withhold non-emergency service until the
occupant, owner, or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid, assigned number. Non-emergency service includes any
services except law enforcement, fire, rescue, or non-emergency medical service.
(Ord. No. 2005-03, 4-21-2005)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
141/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)
(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.
Sec. 34-1. - Amount and collection of tax.
Each residential and commercial unit located within the unincorporated area of the county shall be charged a fee as
established by the board of commissioners from time to time.
The occupant and/or the owner of the residential or commercial unit according to the tax digest for the county shall be billed
for the fee collected under this chapter. The occupant and/or the owner shall be billed monthly by the county showing the
amount due and payable. The term "residence" shall be defined as all single-family dwelling units, including mobile homes and
modular homes, and each individual unit of any multi-family structure, such as duplexes and apartment buildings. The term
"commercial" shall be defined as any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semi-public establishment of any kind.
Said fee shall be due and payable by the tenth day of each following month. A late payment penalty and an assessment of
interest shall be imposed on each account for which payment is not made within the prescribed time limit. There shall also be
imposed on each such delinquent account the administrative cost of reviewing and processing such delinquent account, and
the cost of preparing, issuing, and filing writs of fieri facias thereon. The occupant and/or the owner of each residential or
commercial unit may pay the entire amount due for the calendar year in advance if the occupant and/or the owner desires.
The collection of residential and commercial solid waste fees and administrative and other costs levied pursuant to the terms
of this chapter and all late charges accruing thereto are hereby deemed to be and are constituted a tax, and are hereby levied
severally against the owner and the occupant of each residential and commercial unit, including all residential units located in
mobile home courts and/or trailer courts. The fees, administrative and other costs, late charges and interest billed in this
section shall be treated in all respects as provided by law with respect to ad valorem and state taxes; and uncollected fees,
administrative costs, late charges, and interest shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property upon which the
residential or commercial unit is located, on all of the real property generally of the owner, and on personal property
composing a residential or commercial unit, and upon the personal property of the owner and of the occupant of each
residential or commercial unit until paid. Said liens shall attach by operation of law upon the date each such fee, late charges,
administrative and other costs and interest shall become due, and shall constitute continuing liens upon the properties from
those dates until paid and satisfied, and this chapter shall constitute notice to the world of the attachment of and the existence
of said liens binding upon the world and upon all subsequent successors in title and lien holders, irrespective of whether writs
of fieri facias shall have been issued and/or recorded. Writs of fieri facias may be issued by the county for fees, costs and other
charges, which are past due, and collection may be effected as provided by law for ad valorem or other state taxes as provided
by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3 or other applicable law. The county manager is authorized to enforce the provisions for collection as
provided herein and is authorized to execute writs of fieri facias and all documents necessary for collection once an account is
90 days in arrears.
Any individual, business, corporation, partnership, or any other entity of any type that occupies any residence or undertakes
any commercial activity as defined in this chapter shall notify the county solid waste department within ten days of occupying
a residence or commercial building. Any new resident or commercial enterprise shall be considered a customer of the county
solid waste department, and all taxes and fees imposed by this chapter shall be levied and assessed from the date of
beginning of service or ten days from the date of occupancy of the residence or commercial unit as determined by the director
of the county solid waste department.
It shall be the duty of the county manager to review the status of the fees, late charges and interest levied by the chapter on
March 15, June 15, September 15, and December 15, and to issue a writ of fieri facias for the collection of each such fee, late
charges and interest which shall not have been paid, and for the administrative costs as herein provided, and for all costs of
collection and enforcement as in the case of executions for county ad valorem taxes, and to record said writs on the general
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
142/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
execution document in the office of the clerk of the superior court in the county in which the property is located. Should in any
case this procedure not be followed, such failure shall in no way affect the lien and notice of lien provisions of subsection (d) of
this section.
(Ord. No. 06-2009-1, § 1, 7-7-2009)
Sec. 34-2. - Use of taxes and fees.
All taxes and fees imposed by this chapter shall be used and appropriated to pay for the collection and disposal of all solid waste within
the county. The taxes and fees shall be deposited in a special account set up by the county specifically for this purpose.
(Ord. No. 06-2009-1, § 2, 7-7-2009)
Sec. 34-3. - Solid waste storage and collection.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "solid waste" means putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving, or consumption of food, including food containers, and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of
combustible and noncombustible materials, including waste paper, metals, cans, glass, plastics, and/or other similar materials.
All solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags or vinyl containers supplied by the county or its
designated collector.
Containers must be placed at the curbside of the nearest public road by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next
collection day if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. Containers from residential units must be moved from curbside to
a place on the side or rear within 24 hours of the collection.
The county shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all solid waste (including recyclables) within the
unincorporated areas of the county either through employers of the county or by contract issued to a person, firm,
corporation, partnership, or entity engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal. No person, firm, corporation,
partnership, or entity shall collect, remove, transport, or dispose of any solid waste (including recyclables) within the district
except as provided for herein, except with the express permission of the county.
Solid waste shall be collected once a week from residential units on a day to be established by the county board of
commissioners. The frequency of collection for commercial units shall be at least once per week. More frequent collections
from commercial units may be required if sanitary conditions in and around the container dictate.
The county or the designated contract collector may decline to collect any solid waste containing excess liquid, which is not
properly contained, or is contained in unauthorized containers.
The county or the designated collector shall not be responsible for collection of discarded building materials, dirt, or rock.
The county or the designated collector may elect to collect yard waste, including grass clippings, trees, and tree branches (cut
to a length of no more than four feet), and/or other vegetation, each week on a day to be established by the county board of
commissioners.
(Ord. No. 06-2009-1, § 3, 7-7-2009)
Sec. 34-4. - Violation of chapter.
Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or 30 days imprisonment in the county
jail or both. Ordinance violations may be tried upon citations with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as accusations, as provided by
O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Citations shall be issued by the county manager or designee.
(Ord. No. 06-2009-1, § 4, 7-7-2009)
Chapter 38 - TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Taxation power of county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a), (b)(2).
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
143/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.
Sec. 38-19. - Tax and license required for business dealings in county.
No business shall operate without an occupational license.
For every year, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in
the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and
any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent
business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax
registration shall be shown to the county clerk or to any sheriff's department officers of the county, upon request.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-36)
Sec. 38-20. - Construction of terms; denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from.
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but
specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes.
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation.
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 (Specific, Business, and Occupation Taxes—Definitions), shall be effective as
definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those
specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, and
shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-37)
Sec. 38-21. - Regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure.
A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses.
The amounts of the regulatory fee shall be as established by the board of county commissioners, from time to time.
The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions shall be maintained by the county and a copy thereof
shall be maintained in the county offices.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-38)
Sec. 38-22. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions.
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more
locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no
location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
144/227
(b)
(1)
(2)
practitioner which are working in the county.
Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or
occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the board of commissioners:
Employees Tax Liability
1—25 $ 25.00
25—50   50.00
50—75   65.00
75—100   85.00
100 or more  100.00
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-39)
Sec. 38-23. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no
location or office in the state of the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or
practitioner:
Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose
of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or
Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-40)
Sec. 38-24. - Each line of business to be identied on business registration.
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the lines of business that the
business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county clerk
and that line of business being noted by the county clerk upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-41)
Sec. 38-25. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the county.
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for
the purpose of occupation tax.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-42)
Sec. 38-26. - Professionals as classied in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18).
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall pay the occupation tax as described in section 38-
22(b).
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-43)
Sec. 38-27. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
145/227
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality
or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain
a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-44)
Sec. 38-28. - Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a
condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and
occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are
taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-45)
Sec. 38-29. - When tax due and payable; eect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
Each such occupation tax shall be for each calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and
occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for
delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the county, the registration and tax
shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a 50 percent fee assessed penalty imposed. The
tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the county clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is
to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the
county, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such
offender shall, upon conviction by the county magistrate judge, be punished according to the general penalties described in
section 1-15
In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, the sheriff may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided
by law for tax executions.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-46)
Sec. 38-30. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on
the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 90 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are
devoted to such purpose.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-47)
Sec. 38-31. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall
provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before county registration may be issued.
Each person who is licensed by the state shall provide evidence of such license before the county registration may be issued.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-48)
Sec. 38-32. - Evidence of qualication required if applicable.
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory
matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-49)
Sec. 38-33. - Liability of ocers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
146/227
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said
business as described in this article, and, in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to
the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each
year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to
transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall
be subject to penalties provided thereof.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-50)
Sec. 38-34. - When registration and tax due and payable; eect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically
provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business
registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, and on March 1 of each year hereafter.
Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before
commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession, or
occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 38-35. Said
penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies
herein provided for collection of the occupation tax; and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which
the penalty is applied.
The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the county superior court clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation
whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the
county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such
offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-51)
Sec. 38-35. - Penalty of violation.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the county judge, be punished according to the general
penalties described in section 1-15.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-52)
Sec. 38-36. - The county sheri; subpoena and arrest powers.
The county commissioners and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy sheriff-business
inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 (this law)
and succeeding years.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-53)
Sec. 38-37. - Businesses not covered by this chapter.
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax
pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law:
Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
Those electrical service businesses organized under chapter 3 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness.
Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour,
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
147/227
(8)
(9)
(10)
bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.)
Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-54)
Sec. 38-38. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.
An occupation tax shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the
United States.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-55)
Sec. 38-39. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year.
On or before January 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax
levied for the year shall file with the county clerk, on a form furnished by the county clerk, a signed return setting forth the actual number of
employees of such business during the preceding calendar year.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-57)
Sec. 38-40. - When occupation tax payable, delinquent.
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the county, at the office of the county commission, on January 1 each year and
delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-58)
Sec. 38-41. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses.
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate
limits of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall
estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid based on that number
in accordance with section 38-22 the succeeding year.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-59)
Sec. 38-42. - More than one place or line of business.
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an
occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-60)
Sec. 38-43. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, le returns, permit inspection of books.
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make
any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the
truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the county under this
article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax
registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at
that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the county clerk in
accordance with provisions found in section 38-40. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of
the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of
delinquent occupation tax.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-61)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
148/227
Sec. 38-44. - Eect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation.
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said county after the registration for said business has been
revoked as above, are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner
herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their
managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or
representatives of the county request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns
herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot
suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local
government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-62)
Sec. 38-45. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax.
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the county clerk, upon any tax or
installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the
persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the
date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the county) of the person, partnership, or
corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances of said county and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall
become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the
sheriff or other appropriate officer of said county upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be
advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is
provided by ordinances of said county and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit
of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered
by proper authority upon an execution issued by the county clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against
whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the
entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the
tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due such person as though he
had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-63)
Sec. 38-46. - Amendment, repeal of provision.
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be
construed to deny the right of the commission to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may
increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax
provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same
person, property, or business.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-64)
Sec. 38-47. - Provisions to remain in full force and eect until changed by governing body.
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the commission. All provisions hereto relating to
any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-65)
Sec. 38-48. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
The commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of
occupation tax as set forth in this article.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-66)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
149/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Sec. 38-49. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.
The commission may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more
types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging
selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall
not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or in a plan.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-67)
Sec. 38-50. - Conicts between specic and general provisions.
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall
control.
(Res. of 12-19-2005, § 19-68)
Secs. 38-51—38-75. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.
Sec. 38-76. - Purpose.
Part 4 of article 2 of chapter 5 of title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended by Act No. 187, Georgia Laws
2011 (O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.), authorizes counties and cities that operate a 9-1-1 public safety answering point to impose a
9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless service at the retail point of sale.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, such charges may be imposed at the rate of $0.75 per retail transaction.
Revenues received by a county or municipality from such charges must be deposited in the emergency telephone assistance
fund maintained by the county or municipality.
Imposition of the charge on prepaid wireless service is contingent upon the enactment of an ordinance or resolution of the
county or municipality.
The county participates in a 9-1-1 public safety answering point operated by a joint 9-1-1 authority with the following
jurisdictions: Dooly County, Marion County, Talbot County, Taylor County, Schley County, Sumter County and Webster County.
(Ord. of 7-21-2011, preamble)
Sec. 38-77. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions—Imposed on retail wireless public service.
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)
(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of
$0.75.
(Ord. of 7-21-2011, § 1)
Sec. 38-78. - Same—Collection and remittance.
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and
in the manner provided by chapter 8 of title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on
prepaid wireless calling service.
(Ord. of 7-21-2011, § 2)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
150/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(c)
Sec. 38-79. - Depositing of funds; use of funds.
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in an emergency
telephone system fund maintained by the Middle Flint Regional Authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134; all such funds shall be used
exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f).
(Ord. of 7-21-2011, § 4)
Chapter 42 - TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Advanced Broadband Collocation Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications
towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are to:
Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
Minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to
residents of the county;
Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers;
Locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized;
Encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and
Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively
and efficiently.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-31)
Sec. 42-2. - Denitions.
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be defined in The New Illustrated Book of
Development Definitions (1993, Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the text referenced in this section shall be construed
to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section
and division in which they occur.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
The term "erected" includes the terms "constructed," "located" or "relocated."
The term "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map of Macon County, Georgia.
The term "parcel" includes the term "plot" or "lot."
The term "person" includes the terms "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental
bodies" and all other legal entities.
The term "used" or "occupied" include the term "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
151/227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade
trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
Collocation means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure.
Department means the Macon County Department of Planning and Development.
Director means the director of the county department of planning and development or designee.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the
engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need.
Governing authority means the county board of commissioners, or other governmental entity controlling affected real property.
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower
structure or appurtenance.
Preexisting towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 42-3.
Public officer, as used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, means the director of the county department of planning and development.
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the county
comprehensive plan.
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and
other similar structures.
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment
to avoid abrupt or severe differences.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-32)
Sec. 42-3. - Application of article.
District height limitations. Except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall govern the
location of telecommunications towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of 50 feet.
Governmental exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. Private
facilities and structures proposed for placement on governmentally-owned property shall not be exempt.
Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75
feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's
residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna.
Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective
date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this chapter, other
than the requirements of sections 42-38 and 42-39. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "preexisting towers" or "pre-existing antennas."
Additional antennas. If an additional antenna is collocated upon a pre-existing tower after adoption of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived, then fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 42-35 and 42-36 shall be met as part of
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
152/227
(a)
(b)
the permitting process.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-33)
Sec. 42-4. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure within 90 days of receipt of notice from the department notifying the owner of such
abandonment. If the tower or antenna is not removed within such 90 days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in the
O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-34)
Sec. 42-5. - Conict with other laws.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width, depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than
are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other
statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute or covenants shall govern.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-35)
Secs. 42-6—42-28. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 42-29. - Principal or accessory use.
A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is
considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or
structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including but not limited to setback, buffer and other
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area
within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall
not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-51)
Sec. 42-30. - Inventory of existing sites.
To facilitate the collocation of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna,
or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the department an inventory of the applicant's existing towers or
alternative tower structures.
Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna shall be exempt from this provision. The inventory shall include
all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within a municipality located, in whole or in part,
within the county; or, within one-quarter mile of the border of the county, and shall include specific information about the
location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna collocation of each
tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the department. The department may share such information
with other applicants for a tall structures permit under this article or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas
within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that the department is not, by sharing such information,
in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-52)
Sec. 42-31. - Collocation—Design requirements.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
153/227
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the
collocation of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following:
For towers up to 150 feet in height: The structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two
providers; and
For towers greater than 150 feet in height: The structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at
least three providers.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-53)
Sec. 42-32. - Same—Availability of suitable existing structures.
No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department
and board of commissioners that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the
following:
No existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area
required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements;
Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements;
Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related
equipment;
The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or
structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed
antenna;
The cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable;
The applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-54)
Sec. 42-33. - Aesthetics.
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas,
governed by this article.
Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards
of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment.
For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground
equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower
structure within the county.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-55)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
154/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
Sec. 42-34. - Setbacks and separation.
The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers:
Towers shall be set back a distance equal to one-third of the height of the tower from its base to any public right-of-way
or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower.
Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback
requirements.
In zoning districts other than C-1, C-2, C-3, O-I, OBP, M-1 and M-2, towers over 150 feet in height shall not be located
closer than 1,500 feet from any existing tower that is over 150 feet in height. This requirement shall not apply to amateur
radio towers.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-56)
Sec. 42-35. - Security fencing/anti-climbing devices.
All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped
with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative.
Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless
required by the board of commissioners through the tall structures permit process.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-57)
Sec. 42-36. - Landscaping.
The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers:
Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials
which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and
located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. Landscaped strips shall satisfy the minimum design and planting
requirements for buffers established in the county buffer, landscape and tree ordinance.
Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed
buffer may be utilized.
Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless
required by the board of commissioners through the tall structures permit process.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-58)
Sec. 42-37. - Review of tower and antenna erection by airport division.
If upon receipt of an application for the erection of any tower or alternative tower structure governed by this article, the department
deems that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the airways of the county by the public or interfere with the operation of
existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall be submitted by the department to the airport division of the
department of transportation for review and recommendation.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-59)
Sec. 42-38. - Federal requirements.
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government
with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas
governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months
of the effective date of the ordinance from which such standards and regulations are derived unless a more or less stringent compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing
authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
155/227
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-60)
Sec. 42-39. - Building codes; safety standards.
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Telecommunications Industry Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
department concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, such party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into
compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within the 15 days, the governing
authority may remove the tower at the owner, permittee or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any tower, the department may
consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a
reasonable extension of the above-referenced compliance period. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner
provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-61)
Sec. 42-40. - Change of ownership notication.
Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower
permittee shall notify the department of the transaction in writing within 30 days.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-62)
Secs. 42-41—42-68. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PERMITTED USES
Sec. 42-69. - Administrative review and tall structures permit not required; compliance with requirements and other ordinances.
The uses listed in this article are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative review or approval of a tall structures
permit. However, all such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in article II of this chapter and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-81)
Sec. 42-70. - Collocation of antennas required.
Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower or alternative
tower structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for
collocation does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no
suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 108-54.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-82)
Sec. 42-71. - Permitted uses without antenna collocation.
If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna collocation, as required in section 42-70, is not possible for a given geographic antenna
placement area, the following uses are permitted:
Constructing a new tower, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with such tower or antenna, in the following zoning districts:
C-1 (neighborhood business district);
C-2 (general business district);
C-3 (highway business district);
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
156/227
d.
e.
f.
g.
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(a)
O-I (office-institutional district);
OBP (office-business park district);
M-1 (light industry district);
M-2 (heavy industry district);
provided, however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained in this article,
and are located a minimum distance of two times the height of the tower from any residentially-zoned property.
Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or
other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, if the additional antenna height adds no
more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure, subject to the zoning district restrictions of subsection (1) of this
section.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-83)
Sec. 42-72. - Public notice/appeal.
At least ten days prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a tower as a permitted use, the department
shall cause a sign to be posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the territorial boundaries of the county. Such public notice shall state the nature of the application, street location of
the proposal and height of the proposed structure.
If during the public notice period an objection to the building permit application is raised, the validity of the application and all
pertinent documentation shall be determined by the zoning board of appeals. The objection shall be placed on the first
available agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting following the expiration of the ten-day appeal period. The zoning board of
appeals shall dispense with the objection by either:
A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in the
issuance of a building permit.
A determination that the application is in error. Applications found to be in error must, as a result, be processed through
the tall structures permit process set forth in article V of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-84)
Sec. 42-73. - Appeal of administrative determination.
If a building permit application for a tower as a permitted use is determined by the department of planning and development to not meet
all applicable criteria of this chapter, the building permit applicant may appeal the determination to the zoning board of appeals. The zoning
board of appeals shall dispense with the objection by either:
A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this chapter, which shall result in the
issuance of a building permit.
A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this chapter. Applications which do not
satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, be processed through the tall structures permit process set forth in article
V of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-85)
Secs. 42-74—42-104. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS
Sec. 42-105. - Request for placement of additional antennas; appeal and granting variances.
The department may administratively approve the placement of additional antenna(s) upon towers or alternative tower
structures as set forth in section 42-107
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
157/227
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
Each applicant requesting an administrative approval under this chapter shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and
supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing th
and dimensions of all improvements, including topography (utilizing minimum two-foot contour intervals), tower height requirem
setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and any other information deemed by the
department to be necessary to assess compliance with this article and compatibility with surrounding uses. Amateur radio antenn
meet the requirements of the county construction code. Certain documentation requirements of this section may be waived by th
for amateur radio antenna applications.
The department shall respond to each application within 30 days of its receipt by either approving or denying the application.
One 30-day extension of this review period may be exercised by the department if such additional time is deemed necessary
to adequately assess the request. If the department fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 60 days, the
application shall be deemed to be approved.
As part of any administrative approval, the department may administratively reduce setback requirements up to ten percent to
compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels.
If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with the county zoning
ordinance. In such an instance, the zoning board of appeals may authorize such variances from the terms of this chapter as
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the chapter will, in an
individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship, upon a
finding by the zoning board of appeals that the denial of the variance presents a significant detriment to the
telecommunications service provider making application, and that the denial of the variance is unsubstantially related to the
public welfare.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-101)
Sec. 42-106. - Antenna collocation required; exception.
Applicants for the erection of an antenna, except amateur radio operations, shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower
structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for
collocation does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no
suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 42-30.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-102)
Sec. 42-107. - Uses allowed by administrative approval.
The following uses may be approved by the department after conducting an administrative review:
Installation of an antenna on any alternative tower structure, and further including the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with such antenna, so long as such addition does not add more than
20 feet to the height of the existing structure;
Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower, and further including the
placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with such antenna, so long as the
addition of such antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of such existing tower.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-103)
Secs. 42-108—42-127. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - TALL STRUCTURES PERMIT
Sec. 42-128. - Required for tower construction or antenna placement; issuance deemed necessary for telecommunications and personal wireless
service.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
158/227
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
If the proposed location, height, setback or other aspect of a tower or antenna cannot comply with the minimum requirements es
in article III or IV of this chapter, then a tall structures permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of
antenna in any zoning district.
The following provisions shall also govern the issuance of tall structures permits for telecommunications and personal wireless
service towers and antennas:
In granting a tall structures permit, the board of commissioners may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties.
All information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or qualified industry expert. However, amateur radio antennas shall meet
the requirements of the county construction code.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-121)
Sec. 42-129. - Application; contents; fee.
All applications for tall structures permits shall be submitted to the department of planning and development. Each application shall
contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 42-130. An application for a tall structures permit shall not
be accepted for processing without the information required in this chapter. An application fee shall be charged by the department in an
amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-122)
Sec. 42-130. - Exhibits required.
Each applicant requesting a tall structures permit under this chapter shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and supporting
drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts,
showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including topography (utilizing minimum two-foot contour intervals), tower height
requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and any other information deemed by
the department to be necessary to assess compliance with this article and compatibility with surrounding uses.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-123)
Sec. 42-131. - Collocation of antennas required.
Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower
structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for
collocation does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no
suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 42-32.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-124)
Sec. 42-132. - Public hearing.
Before taking action upon the proposed tall structures permit, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At
least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the board of commissioners shall cause the following notice requirements to be
instituted by the department of planning and development:
A sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the property under consideration. The sign shall state
the time, place, location, and purpose of the public hearing.
A letter shall be sent by regular mail to all property owners of record of abutting parcels, and all residentially-zoned
parcels lying in whole or in part within a distance of two times the height of the proposed tower as measured from its
base, giving notice of the public hearing. Owners of record shall be as indicated by the county tax commissioners records.
The letter shall state the same information as required for the sign.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-125)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
159/227
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Sec. 42-133. - Considerations in approval or denial of tall structures permits.
Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record. The governing authority shall consider the following factors in acting upon a tall structures permit
application under the provisions of this chapter:
The height and setbacks of the proposed tower;
The proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
The surrounding topography;
The surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
The design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
The proposed ingress and egress;
The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna collocation; and
The impact of the proposed tower upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area.
(Ord. of 3-1-2005, § 108-126)
Appendix A - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, as enacted by the board of county commissioners by ordinance adopted on August
27, 2002. Amendments to this ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history
note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been
corrected without notation. Where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed.
Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets.
State Law reference— Georgia Zoning Procedure Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.
[ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL]
Sec. 1. - Title and objectives.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Macon County, Georgia," for the purpose of setting forth standards and
permissible uses of land designed to conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of Macon County; to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health, aesthetics, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living conditions and stability in neighborhoods; to facilitate
the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements by dividing Macon County into
districts of such size and shapes as may be best suited to carry out the purposes of the legislative act and of this resolution.
Sec. 2. - Legislative authority.
Counties of the State of Georgia are authorized by the Georgia State Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4, and Chapter 66 of
Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, to exercise the powers of planning and zoning; and it is hereby determined by the Board of
Commissioners of Macon County, Georgia, that it is necessary and desirable to adopt these zoning regulations under the authority of the
above cited Constitutional and statutory provisions.
Sec. 3. - Method of regulation.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
160/227
Now therefore be it resolved that the Board of Commissioners of Macon County, Georgia, as authorized by the Constitution of the State
of Georgia, and having created herewith a Zoning Commission known as the Macon County Zoning Commission, does hereby adopt these
zoning regulations for the following purposes: (1) to define certain words used herein; (2) to create district boundaries; (3) to regulate the
location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries; (4) to regulate the density in distribution of population; (5) to provide for the
gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures; (6) to provide for the method of administration, amendment
and enforcement; (7) to provide for imposition of penalties for violations; (8) to repeal conflicting ordinances and resolutions; (9) and for
other purposes.
Sec. 4. - Jurisdiction.
This zoning ordinance shall govern the use of all land and development within the unincorporated limits of Macon County, Georgia, and
within the limits of any inactive municipality in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-70-5.
Sec. 5. - Denitions.
For the purpose of this resolution, words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular number
unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
The word "shall" is mandatory. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to the line
relation to which the distance is specified. The word "lot" includes the words "parcel" and " plot"; the word "used" shall be deemed also to
include "designed," "intended," or "arranged to be used"; the term "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed," "reconstructed,"
"altered," "placed," or "moved." The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building."
The word "adjacent" means "nearby" and not necessarily "contiguous."
Accessory Building or Accessory Use. A detached, subordinate structure for use such as a garage, workshop and the like, functionally
related to, clearly incidental to, and located on the same lot as the principal structure or use.
Adult Entertainment. Performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances
are characterized by the display or exposure of specific anatomical areas.
Adult Entertainment Establishments. Any commercial establishment, which has as its primary purposes or business the offer for sale of
any book, publication, or film which depicts nudity, or sexual conduct, or engages in services such as bath houses, massage parlors, wrestling
parlors or like activity, including a night club, restaurant, cabaret, lounge, or other establishment which features adult entertainment.
Agriculture or Agricultural. The bona fide use of a parcel of land of ten (10) acres or more for the cultivation of land, raising of poultry
and/or livestock, or for similar agrarian activity including forestry for gain or profit, and the related buildings (e.g., packing shed, feed mill,
etc.) structures, and appurtenances associated with or necessary to carry out the aforementioned activities.
Airfield. Any area of land or water with airspace certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and utilized for the landing or taking off
of aircraft.
Airport. Any area of land or water with airspace certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and designed and set aside for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and utilized, or to be utilized, in the public interest for such purposes. An airport shall include all runways,
terminal buildings, hangars, and related facilities located on the airport premises.
Apartment Building. A single-structure located on a parcel of land under single or joint ownership, containing four or more independent,
residential units with cooking facilities for the sole use of each residential unit.
Automobile Sales Lot. An open premises arranged, designed, or used for storage and display for sale of any motorized vehicle and/or
trailer which can be towed legally on Georgia roadways.
Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Base flood is synonymous with the
term "regional" or "100-year" flood.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
161/227
Biomedical Waste Facility. Any facility or location where the final disposition of any amount of biomedical waste (as that term is defined in
O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended) occurs, whether or not mixed with or including other waste allowed under Subtitle D of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, and includes, but is not limited to, biomedical waste landfills and biomedical waste
thermal treatment technology facilities.
Boarding House. A dwelling in which lodging and meals are furnished for compensation. Maximum occupancy shall be governed by life
safety codes.
Buffer. That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open
space for the purposes of screening and separating properties with incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the
common property line into a given lot. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs, and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site
development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings.
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering and designed, built, or
used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind including tents or awnings used for purposes of a building.
Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the
building to the highest point of the building.
Building Line. A line beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building shall not
project.
Building, Principal. The building in which is conducted the principal and primary use of the lot on which the structure is situated.
Care Home. A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated on a profit or
non-profit basis to provide lodging and meals and domiciliary care for the aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. The term "care
home" shall include the term "extended care facility" as defined by Georgia Law. Such facility shall be licensed pursuant to applicable Georgia
codes. This term does not include facilities for the care of metal patients, alcoholics, drug addicts, and does not include nursery school.
Caretaker or Employee Residence. An accessory residence (including mobile and manufactured homes) placed on an otherwise occupied
tract for use by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself.
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religion worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such
worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Club or Lodge. Building in which organized religious, fraternal, recreational, social or educational meetings are conducted on a regular,
non-profit basis. Fraternal organizations must show that they have received recognition and sanction from a parent group or organization. A
private club must show that its membership is limited by either: (a) the use and operation of an amateur athletic facility including but not
limited to golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges or swimming pools; or (b) residency in a particular subdivision, condominium,
apartment project or other residential development.
Conditional Use. A use which is not permitted inherently in a specific district, but which may be permitted under specific conditions
subject to approval by the Board of Commissioners.
Cul-de-sac. A street which has one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a circular turn-around.
Condominium. A building or building on a single parcel comprised of multiple dwelling units in which each tenant holds full title to his
dwelling unit and joint ownership in the common grounds.
Day Care Center. An establishment operating for profit which provides care and education for six or more children opened for the major
portion of the day or night and in which meals are served.
Designated Official. The official or other designated authority charged by the Macon County Board of Commissioners with the
administration and enforcement of this resolution or his duly appointed representative.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
162/227
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Drive-In. Any retail or service enterprise wherein a good or service is provided to the consumer on the inside of the principal building and
to the consumer while in his motor vehicle through an exterior wall of the principle building. The term "drive-in" includes but is not limited to
drive-in restaurants and dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and car washes.
Dwelling Unit. A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for occupancy by not more than one family for living purposes and
having cooking facilities.
Easement. A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for road right-of-way or other specified
purposes.
Equestrian Center. A tract of land of five acres or more on which more than four adult horses are kept for the purpose of training,
boarding, sale or breeding, or where instruction pertaining to the same is given for a fee. For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, this term
includes facilities for riding trails and rings, shows, competitive equestrian events and riding lessons.
Family. One or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, including foster children, as that term is defined under Georgia Law, no single dwelling unit shall contain over five
persons.
Farm. A parcel of land consisting of a minimum of ten (10) acres on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as
specified in "agriculture."
Farm Stand. A booth or stall located on a farm from which produce and farm products only are sold to the general public.
Farmland, Prime. Land which is best suited to producing food, feed, forage, fiber and oilseed crops, produces the highest yields with
minimum inputs of energy and money, and results in the least damage to the environment when farmed.
Farm Animal House. Structure designed primarily for the housing of cattle, swine, sheep, emus, etc for commercial sale of milk or
animals.
Fish Farm.
Commercial. A business enterprise in which the grower's income is derived from harvesting fish in mass, and subsequent
bulk sale of large volume catches to one buyer, usually under contract.
Recreational. A facility in which fishermen catch fish, usually one at a time, for sport and/or food, and in which the owner
of the facility may or may not charge for the fish taken.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodplain. The low-lying and relatively flat areas adjoining inland waters, and including, at a minimum, that area subject to a one percent
or greater change of flooding in any given year.
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Flood Zone. Zones as they appear on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in which the risk premium insurance rates have been
established by a Flood Insurance Study.
Frontage. That dimension of a lot measured along the front right-of-way line thereof or if said front right-of-way line is curved along the
chord of the arc.
Garage Repair. Building(s) and premises designed or used for the purpose of service or commercial repair of motor vehicles, provided (1)
that all body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings, (2) that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled
parts or supplies shall be solely for the purpose repairing motor vehicles and not as a salvage or junkyard business, and (3) that the storage
of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies not be visible beyond the premises.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
163/227
Group Home. A residence under the ownership and supervision of a public educational or governmental institution occupied or intended
for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, and in which cooking facilities are shared among all resident persons or families.
Hazardous Waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are in force and effect on February 1, 1991, codified as 40
CFR Section 261.3 and any designated hazardous waste, and as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62, as amended.
Hazardous Waste Facility. Any property or facility that is intended or used for storage, treatment, or disposal of hazardous waste and
which has been legally certified, licensed, approved and otherwise sanctioned by the appropriate state and federal agencies.
Home Occupation. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and which is carried on by a resident thereof and no
more than two nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. A Home
Occupation does not allow access by the public. A Home Occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a Home Office but more restrictive
than a Residential Business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business.
Home Office. An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no other individual, and
which is clearly incidental and secondary to use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The office may be for the purpose of service or trade
workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, real estate salespersons, or individuals who
work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. There will be no changes that would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal
from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office shall be limited to one room of the
dwelling and not exceed more than three hundred square feet in area. Home Office shall not include any business, which involves the sale,
manufacture or repair of merchandise on the premises. Home Offices shall also not include any business requiring access by the public,
including, but not limited to, customers, clients or vendors. No outside storage or display, including signs is permitted and no one other than
family members who reside on the premises may be employed in the office.
Hospital. Any institution receiving patients and rendering medical care including those wherein mentally retarded, mentally disturbed,
epileptic, alcoholic or drug addicted, chronically ill and physically disabled patients are treated or cared for. Such facility shall be legally and
properly certified, licensed, approved and otherwise sanctioned by the appropriate state or federal agency.
Hunting/Fishing Camp. A location at which permanent and/or temporary housing facilities are located for temporary occupancy by
hunters and fishermen.
Industrial Park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a
park setting for industrial establishments.
Kennel, Commercial. Any place in or at which more than four adult dogs, cats, rabbits or other domesticated animals are kept for the
purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding or training, and for which any fee is charged for such services. This term does not apply to similar
facilities operated for agrarian or agricultural purposes.
Laboratory. An establishment or premises where scientific services are provided including testing or analysis of medical, chemical,
physical, mechanical, electric or electronic nature, or the calibration of instruments.
Landfill. An area of land on which, or an excavation in which, solid waste is placed for permanent disposal and which is not a land
application unit, surface impoundment, injection well, or compost pile, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, as amended.
Lodging Home. See "boarding house."
Lot. A parcel of land which satisfies the area requirements for the district within which it is located, or on which exists a legal
nonconforming use, and has frontage along or legal access to a public right-of-way, and is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for
building development. A lot shall have a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of the County Tax Commissioner
and/or the County Tax Appraiser.
Lot Line, Front. The front property line coincident with the street right-of-way line. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line
facing the principal building entrance.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
164/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Lot Line, Rear. The rear lot line is generally opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes
to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, and lying wholly
within the lot and farthest from the front lot line.
Lot, Substandard. A lot, which does not meet the minimum lot size requirements for the district in which it is located.
Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines measured at the front building line.
Manufactured Home. A structure, built and transportable in one or more sections on a permanent chassis/running gear, and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured Homes shall be constructed in accordance with the Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et [seq.]
Materials Recovery Facility. A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials,
materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or
any combination of such materials, and as that term is defined in state statute.
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or
more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for non-transient use and
occupancy or for rental occupancy. The term "park" includes the term "community."
Modular Home. A factory fabricated transportable (carted) building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a
permanent foundation as a permanent structure with the appearance of a conventional, on-site constructed building to be used for
residential purposes, bearing a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia
Industrialized Building Act, or the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended.
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guestrooms and having separate outside entrances for each guestroom. To be used
primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge," but not "boarding house" as defined in this
section.
Nonconforming Use. Any use of a parcel or lot of land and/or building which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of this resolution and
which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Occupy. To use land or buildings for any length of time for a purpose for which the land or a building or part thereof is used or is
intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy" shall be encompassed by this definition.
[Open Air Businesses.] Open Air Businesses shall include the following:
Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground
equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment.
Retail sale of fruit and vegetables.
Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement
park or similar recreation services.
Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment sales, repair service or rental service.
Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar uses.
Park, Community. A parcel of land owned by a unit of government or a private organization and used or intended to be used for
recreational or leisure time activities, and which is open to the public at no charge. Such parks may include food or recreational sales as
accessory uses.
Plat. A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel of land depicting the relative positions of lot lines, street rights-of-way and
easements with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
165/227
Plat, Development. A preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate its workability
and conformation to the design requirements of the subdivision regulations in all aspects, but not in final form for recording and the details
are not completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the planning board prior to any development.
Plat, Final. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification
necessary for commission. Streets shown on the plat shall be approved by the board of commissioners prior to recordation.
Poultry House. [A] structure designed primarily for the housing of chickens, turkeys, or ducks for commercial sale of eggs or birds.
Houses containing more than 26,500 chickens will be considered as two houses.
Private Way. A private street, drive or road provided solely for those property owners whose property is contiguous to and have a legal
right to use.
Public Right-of-Way. A street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat and/or prescription.
Recreational Use of a Commercial Nature. A building or use which provides entertainment, education, recreation or amusement for profit
such as, but not limited to, a health spa, dance hall, bowling alley, skating rink, shooting range, amusement park, private zoo, sports stadium
or arena, art gallery, concert hall, swimming pool or drive-in theater.
Recreational Vehicle. A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed
for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreation or other trips which provides sleeping accommodations.
Residence. A building containing only residential units and which meets all the applicable requirements of the Standard Building Code for
conventional construction. The term "residence" or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, boarding house, rooming
house, motel or other accommodations used for transient occupancy, and shall not, for the purpose of this regulation, include travel trailers,
mobile homes or manufactured homes.
Residence, Single-Family. A building other than a mobile home, manufactured home, or travel trailer designed for occupation by one
family.
Residence, Multi-Family. A building comprised of three or more dwelling units.
Restaurant. An establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar,
concession stand or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community swimming pool, playground, park or marina operated solely for
the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant.
Residential Business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no
more than three (3) nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The
business may allow access by the public. The Residential Business is designed to be less restrictive than a Home Office or Home Occupation
but more restrictive than a Rural Business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business.
Right-of-way Line. The outside boundary of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, recorded easement, deed,
dedication or by the official right-of-way map of Macon County.
Road. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Rural Business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, an accessory structure or outside the dwelling and which is
carried on by a resident of that property and no more than fifteen (15) nonresidents, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the property for residential dwelling purposes. The business may allow access by the public. The Rural Business is designed to be less
restrictive than a Home Office, Home Occupation or Residential Business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of
employees and types of business.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, or the lot line of an adjacent lot, and the front, rear or side lines
of a building on the lot with setback restrictions. The term "required setback" means a line beyond which a building is not permitted to
extend under the provision of this zoning ordinance establishing minimum depth and widths of yards.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
166/227
Salvage Yard. The use of any space, whether inside or outside a building, for the storage, keeping, salvage or sale of junk, scrap metals or
other scrap materials, including the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of one or more automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or
parts thereof.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed and owned or managed as a unit with on-site parking and
of similar architectural characteristics.
Slow Rate Land Treatment System. A system for wastewater treatment by spray irrigation (land application). The term refers to the
advanced treatment of wastewater by irrigation on the land to support vegetative growth. For purposes for this zoning ordinance, the use
may include ponds (lagoons) for the temporary storage of the treated wastewater before application to the spray fields.
Solid Waste Handling Facility. A facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization,
processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 as amended).
Special Flood Hazard Area. Flood prone land subject to a one- percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In absence of
official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, such areas shall be those designated by the Macon County Board of
Commissioners.
Street. See "Road."
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or semi-permanent location on the ground, or attached
to something having permanent location on the ground.
Townhouse. A residential structure containing three or more attached single-family units designed as a single structure having common
or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door which opens to the outdoors, and the units shall have two floors, but without access
between adjoining units.
Travel Trailer. A portable, vehicular structure not over eight feet wide by thirty-five feet long designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational and vacation uses, and which may or may not have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities, but if such facilities
are included, a sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required. Any vehicle designed or converted to a design with plumbing connections
for attachment to outside sewage systems shall not be included in this definition.
Travel Trailer Park. A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents or other
camping units for temporary occupancy. Maximum length of occupancy of any tenant shall not exceed sixty consecutive days.
Use, Permitted. Those uses specifically listed in this resolution as "uses permitted inherently" and conditional uses subject to approval by
the board of commissioners.
Use, Principal. The principal purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Variance. A grant of relief or other modification of the requirements of this ordinance.
Vehicle. Any device or contrivance for carrying or conveying persons or objects, said device being designed to be self-propelled by its own
motor or power.
Water System, Community. A potable water supply and treatment system other than an individual or public water system serving more
than one building, residence, manufactured or mobile home or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. The
system is one which is owned by a person or legal entity other than a unit of government.
Water System, Individual. A potable water system other than a community or public water system serving a single building, residence,
manufactured or mobile home, or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation.
Water System, Public. A potable water supply and treatment system, other than an individual or community water system, owned by a
unit of government.
Zoning Commission. The public body appointed by the Macon County Board of Commissioners, members of which serve specified terms,
responsible for administering the Macon County Zoning Ordinance and, when deemed appropriate, recommending to the Macon County
Board of Commissioners specific changes in said ordinance.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
167/227
ARTICLE I[II]. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
For purposes of this ordinance, the area of Macon County outside the incorporated communities of Ideal, Marshallville, Montezuma, and
Oglethorpe, is divided into land use districts or zones for the purposes of promoting the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories, size
of open space, density and distribution of population and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation,
agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against flooding, public activities, and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in
roads and streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote the public health and general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population, to prevent urban sprawl; to facilitate
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions
and stability of neighborhoods; to protect against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the
value of buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout Macon County, and for other
purposes.
Sec. 2. - Districts.
ARTICLE DISTRICT NAME SYMBOL PAGE
IV[V] Agriculture AG-1 19
V[VI] Rural Residential RR 28
VI[VII] River Protection RP 29
VII[VIII] Site-Built Residential (single-family) R-1 30
VIII[IX] Manufactured Home (single-family) R-2 32
IX[X] Multi-Family Residential R-3 33
X[XI] Manufactured Home Park R-4 34
XI[XII] Manufactured Home Subdivision R-5 43
XII[XIII] Recreational Vehicle Park RVP 44
XIII[XIV] Local Commercial C-1 46
XIV[XV] General Commercial C-2 48
XV[XVI] Industrial I 51
XVI[XVII] Flood Hazard FH 53
XVII[XVIII] Cultural/Historical CH 55
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
168/227
Sec. 3. - Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, land lot lines, militia district lines, railroad lines, stream beds or
river beds, private lot lines or corporate limit lines, such lines existing at the time of passage of the zoning resolution shall be construed to be
such boundaries.
Where a district boundary divides a parcel, location of the district boundary shall be determined by use of the map scale appearing on
the official zoning map, unless clearly indicated otherwise by dimensions on the zoning map.
Where a public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the vacated property shall be considered as being within the same zoning
district as the adjoining property.
Where district boundaries are shown so as to indicate they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of roads or highways, such
boundaries shall be construed as being measured from or being parallel to the center lines of such roads or highways. If no distance is
provided, dimensions shall be determined by the use of the map scale appearing on the official zoning map.
ARTICLE II[III]. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
In addition to requirements stipulated elsewhere in this resolution, the use of land shall be subject to the following general provisions:
Sec. 1. - Scope.
No building structure, land or part thereof, shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure shall hereinafter be erected,
constructed, re-constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained on or of any building,
structure or land or part thereof, except in conformity with the provision of this ordinance with the exception of farm accessory buildings.
Sec. 2. - Accessory building.
An accessory building shall not be located less than ten (10) feet from side or rear lot lines.
When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall be considered
part of the principal building and shall comply with the yard/setback requirements of the principal building.
No accessory building shall be constructed prior to construction of the principal use building, with the exception of farm buildings in the
Agriculture district.
An accessory building in the side yard of a corner lot shall not be closer to the right-of-way line of a side road than the required front yard
setback along said side road.
Sec. 3. - Automobile service station/truck terminals.
All fuel pumps and above-ground storage tanks shall be setback at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest road right-of-way line.
Curb cuts (vehicular entrance or exit) for service stations shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width, and there shall not be more than
two (2) curb cuts to a service station per road frontage. Two (2) curb cuts on the same road frontage shall be separated by a distance of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet. Curb cuts shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest road intersection.
Where a service station abuts a residential district, the commercial land use must erect a solid evergreen buffer, solid fence or wall at
least six (6) feet high along that portion of the boundary shared with the residential district.
Sec. 4. - Corner visibility.
No structure, plant(s) or other visual obstruction between the heights of two (2) feet and twelve (12) feet above grade elevation shall be
allowed or permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of two (2) road rights-of-way, or the intersection of a road right-of-way
and railroad right-of-way. Utility poles and traffic signs may be allowed in said area.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
169/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
3.
Sec. 5. - Home occupations.
The intent of this section is to provide for the reasonable development of home occupations as an accessory use to a residential use.
The owner of a home occupation must have a county business license as required by county code.
The number of employees not living on-site shall be limited to two.
No internal or external physical alteration which would be inconsistent with residential use of the building shall be
permitted.
Business use shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence.
No mechanical equipment shall be used for a home occupation except that which is normally used for domestic or
agricultural purposes.
No display of products shall be visible from the road, and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the
premises.
The only vehicles permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation shall be vehicles used
primarily as passenger vehicles.
Adequate off-street parking must be provided for the residents, employees and business visitors.
Only one (1) point-of-business, motionless, non-lighted sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, is allowed on-site,
and it must be attached to the structure housing the home occupation. No advertising signs are allowed on-site.
The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood.
Nursing or convalescent homes, childcare centers, boarding houses, massage studios; restaurants or similar
establishments shall not be considered home occupations.
Sec. 6. - Limited use (LU) provision.
Upon receipt of a rezoning petition the Zoning Commission may determine the proposed development, though neither permitted nor
conditioned in the district in which the proposed development site is located, may have less impact than some of the land uses permitted or
conditioned in the district. The Zoning Commission may, in response to a rezoning petition, recommend to the Board of Commissioners that
the site in question be approved for development as a specific limited use (e.g., C-2 LU beauty shop) rather than for the more general land
use of commercial development. However, any such limited use must previously have been specifically permitted or conditioned in at least
one of the county's zoning districts.
Sec. 7. - Lot frontage.
Each lot containing a principal building shall have frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet on a publicly owned or maintained right-ofway, except as may otherwise be stipulated herein. A variance may be permitted for lot frontage on a cul-de-sac, provided lot width at the
building line is not less than the frontage granted by variance.
Sec. 8. - One principal building per lot.
Except as otherwise provided herein, only one single-family, detached dwelling and its customary accessory structures shall hereafter be
placed or erected on any residential lot. For the purpose of supporting farming operations there shall be permitted in the Agriculture district
one (1) secondary residential use per each ten (10) acres on a farm under single ownership (maximum of eight secondary residences) where
the following conditions can be met:
Each secondary residence can be established only for persons directly supporting farming operations or for siblings
and/or their spouses.
Each secondary residence shall occupy a land area of not less than one acre reserved for the specific use of said
residence.
Each such land area shall be identified by permanent, physical markers and assigned an address in accordance with the
county's system of addressing rural properties.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
170/227
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
1.
Each such land area shall receive approval from the county health department as to its suitability as a site for an effective sa
disposal system designed to accommodate wastes generated by occupants of said site.
A domestic water supply which satisfies the rules and regulations administered by the county health department shall be
made available to each secondary residence.
No commercial use of this special provision shall be permitted.
Each secondary residence shall have a minimum road frontage of 100 feet; have direct access to the public thoroughfare
system.
Individual power supply sources shall be provided to each secondary residence, and each utility installation shall meet
such standards as have been adopted by appropriate, local authorities.
Secondary residences shall meet the requirements of local construction codes established by the Macon County Board of
Commissioners.
Any change in use or occupancy must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
Permits for construction will not be issued prior to approval of each of the aforementioned conditions, as applicable.
Sec. 9. - Open air business.
Open air businesses shall blend with the rural environment in which they are permitted, and be compatible with surrounding rural
development. Open air business uses shall include the following:
Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground
equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment.
Retail sale of fruit and vegetables.
Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf, golf driving range, children's amusement
park or similar recreation services.
Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, boat or home equipment sales, repair service or rental service.
Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools and similar uses.
Sec. 10. - Prohibited uses in residential districts.
Parking or open storage of wrecked or junked vehicles, and/or power driven construction
Storage of used lumber, metal or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in quantities that exceed the need of
the homeowner.
(Ord. of 2-18-2010)
Sec. 11. - District boundary dividing a lot.
Where a district boundary divides a lot, tract or parcel of land at the time such district boundary is established, the use classification of
the less-restrictive district may be extended to the property line of said lot, tract or parcel if so requested by the current landowner within
thirty (30) days of the original adoption of this ordinance. Such an extension should not be extended beyond the next land lot line.
Owner of the lot so divided may extend a use allowed on either portion of said lot fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary line in
accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. The owner will have to comply with other
applicable provisions of this ordinance (e.g., screens and buffers).
Sec. 12. - Protective screening and buer strips.
All plans for protective screening shall be submitted to the Zoning Commission Zoning Administrator for prior approval of materials, their
use and the arrangement thereof. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Commission screening would serve no good purpose, the Commission may
waive protective screening requirements.
Residential Buffers. Where an industrial or commercial district abuts directly upon a residential district, a landscaped
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
171/227
2.
3.
4.
5.
greenbelt, not less than twenty (20) feet deep, shall be established by and maintained by said industrial or commercial
developer along the industrial or commercial property's entire boundary with the residential zone. Such greenbelt shall
be planted with deciduous trees, evergreens, flowering trees and/or ornamental trees set no closer than six (6) feet to the
fence or wall. The remainder of the landscaped area, which is not planted with the aforementioned stock, shall be in wellkept lawn. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition.
Landscape Strip Required. The owner/developer of any: (1) property zoned R-3, (2) commercially zoned property which
abuts an industrial zone, (3) industrially zoned property which abuts a commercial zone, (4) commercially or industrially
zoned property which abuts a residential zone, (5) conditional use commercial or conditional use industrial property shall
provide landscape strips, as herein defined, ten (10) feet deep along the full length of the developed portion abutting any
public road, and five (5) feet deep along the developed portion of side and rear property lines.
Acceptable Plant Material. In those instances where the natural vegetation and topography is insufficient to achieve the
desired level of screening as required by this chapter, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant
material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen. Acceptable trees (excluding dwarf
varieties) for use in required buffers and landscape strips include, but are not limited to, the following:
American Holly Loblolly Pine
Arizona Cypress Redbay Loquat
Cherry Laurel Virginia Pine
Eastern Red Cedar White Pine
Leyland Cypress Yaupon Holly
Little Gem Magnolia
Shrubs. Shrubs used to form hedges shall not be deciduous. They shall be at least two (2) feet above ground level when
planted. They shall be spaced in such a way that when mature, they will form a continuous visual screen (hedge) that is at
least six (6) feet in height. Acceptable types of shrubs include, but are not limited to, the following:
Burford Holly Japanese Privet
California Privet Northern Bayberry
Cleyera Pittsporum
European Privet Sasanqua Camellia
Euonymus Southern Waxmyrtle
Japan Yew Tea Olive
Salvage Yard Buffers. A solid-faced fence eight (8) feet high, and buffer strip eight (8) feet deep, as defined herein,
meeting acceptable standards designated by the Zoning Commission, and providing an adequate visual shield, shall be
erected along all road frontages and all sides visible from public roadways.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
172/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Sec. 13. - Agreement with health codes.
No requirement mandated herein shall be enforced where said requirement or provision is in conflict with public health, safety and
welfare codes enforced by the Macon County Health Department.
Sec. 14. - Manufactured home requirements.
Additions. Any addition to a mobile home or accessory building shall comply with applicable requirements of the Building,
Electrical, Plumbing and Gas Codes.
Foundations. All residential and accessory buildings shall be placed on properly engineered foundations which meet applicable
installation requirements and applicable state and local codes.
Siding Material. All mobile homes shall have exterior siding materials consisting of either wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
hardboard siding, vinyl or metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to ground level, except that when a solid
concrete or masonry perimeter foundation (under-pinning) is used, the siding material need not extend below the top of the
foundation.
Tie-Down. All mobile homes shall be secured to their respective sites in accordance with applicable state codes.
Certificate of Occupancy. Satisfactory compliance with all permitting and inspection requirements shall be achieved before the
Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
Manufactured homes not meeting criteria listed above must be removed from Macon County or brought into compliance
within 30 days of notification of non-compliance by the County Building Inspector.
Sec. 15. - Shared open space prohibited.
Required open space may not be used by another building. No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space
required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open
space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure, or use.
Sec. 16. - Reduction of yard or lot area.
No lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does
not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or
division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use.
Sec. 17. - Every lot shall abut a road.
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut an open public road or a private road meeting current county development
standards and duly approved by the County Engineer.
Sec. 18. - Multiple frontage lots.
Lots which front more than one road or street shall satisfy the front setback requirements for each road or street it fronts.
Sec. 19. - Uses prohibited.
If either a use or class of use is not specifically stated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right, or as a Special Exception,
then such use, class of use, or structures for such use shall be prohibited in such district.
Sec. 20. - Substandard lots of record.
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which has an area or a width which is less than that required by
this ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in that zone; provided, however, that the same yard, setback,
open space, and other dimensional requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
173/227
Sec. 21. - Substandard lots resulting from public dedication or condemnation.
In the event an undeveloped lot of record is reduced in size through an act of public dedication or condemnation for public purposes, the
development standards contained in the chapter [ordinance] for width, depth, or area may be waived by the planning commission and such
property may be utilized for all permitted and, where authorized, conditional uses. Said waiver is permissible only if the county health
department determines that the health and general welfare of the lot owner and Macon County will not be adversely affected by the intended
use. Adjacent, underdeveloped lots of record which are owned by the same individual and which are affected by dedication or condemnation
for public purposes shall be combined, where possible, to standard lots.
ARTICLE III[IV]. - NONCONFORMING USES
Sec. 1. - Continued use.
All legal land uses existing and active as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue in the same land use, even if
such land use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance. All such land uses shall be considered to be nonconforming.
Sec. 2. - Extension and alteration.
No permit shall be issued to physically extend or structurally alter a nonconforming land use except to make said use conform to, or
comply with, the provisions and requirements of this ordinance.
Sec. 3. - Abandonment.
A nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a continuous twelve-month period shall not be reestablished. However, a
nonconforming, vacant, manufactured home slab foundation may be reestablished as a manufactured home site at any time in any district,
except a commercial or industrial district, provided said use is reestablished in compliance with all applicable standards of the county health
department. Any other use at the site of a previously abandoned land use shall be in conformity with provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 4. - Reestablishment/restoration after damage.
A nonconforming land use damaged by fire, storm or any other cause may be restored to the same nonconforming use as existed before
such damage provided restoration is begun within twelve months of such damage.
Sec. 5. - Restoration to a safe condition.
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any building to a safe and sanitary condition when required to do so by the
proper authorities of the county.
Sec. 6. - Change in tenancy or ownership.
Nonconforming land uses shall be allowed to continue under changes in tenancy, management and/or ownership.
Sec. 7. - Change in use.
A nonconforming land use shall not be changed to another nonconforming land use.
Sec. 8. - Nonconforming signs.
A nonconforming sign shall not be improved (other than for normal maintenance), altered or relocated except in conformance with
provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 9. - Nonconforming salvage yards- expansion and screening.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
174/227
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
All nonconforming salvage yards shall be made to conform with the general provisions of this ordinance within a two-year period of
ordinance adoption. Salvage yard expansion and screening requirements follow:
A buffer eight (8) feet high and eight (8) feet deep is required along the full perimeter of the salvage yard. If constructed,
the buffer must be of wood, concrete or other materials approved by the Zoning Commission. If planted, the vegetation
selected must be of a species and variety which, with the required proper maintenance, will reach a minimum height of
eight feet within five years of planting. Both types of buffer must be maintained so as to block the view of the salvage
yard, and help deflect, muffle or absorb noise generated by activities in the salvage yard.
Screening is intended to shield the view and reduce audible noise levels of salvage yards from surrounding properties
and roadways, and to protect surrounding properties from fire. Modification of these requirements may be granted at
the discretion of the Zoning Commission when the requested modification does not contravene the intent of these
regulations. Requests for modification must be filed with the Zoning Officer and require a public hearing.
No salvage yard existing at the time this ordinance is adopted shall be expanded unless it meets requirements for
screening.
Sec. 10. - Exception for extension and alteration of non-conforming farm-animal operations.
Nothing in Article III[IV], Section 2 or Article III[IV], Section 3 of this ordinance shall prohibit the replacement or alteration in a farm-animal
house which was lawfully existing and active as of the effective date of this ordinance, even if such replacement or alteration does not
conform to the provisions of this ordinance. For the purposes of this Section, farm-animal operations include farm animal houses and poultry
houses, as defined above in the Preamble, Section 5: Definitions, which begins on page 1 of this ordinance. The non-conforming use shall in
no way be expanded except by a variance granted by Section II [2] of Article XX[XXI].
(Ord. of 6-19-2008)
ARTICLE IV[V]. - AGRICULTURE DISTRICT (AG)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The Agriculture District is established in recognition of the high incidence of prime farmland in the county, high rate of farmer
participation in the farmland preferential tax assessment program, the general population decline which has occurred in the unincorporated
area during the preceding forty-year period (1960-2000), projections which suggest little, if any, population increase by the year 2010, and the
relative absence of municipal utility services in the unincorporated area. There is no indication of appreciable change in land use, and the
need is not so much to prevent development that might conflict with future urban patterns as it is to protect the prevailing land use from
conversion to uses which would conflict with and are detrimental to agriculture. The intent is to protect the right-to-farm while allowing nonagricultural land uses which are compatible with agriculture, and which tend to support and serve the needs of residents and land use in the
Agriculture district. Minimum lot size in the Agricultural District (AG-1) is one (1) acre. However, a minimum of ten (10) acres is required per
secondary residence on each farm (See Article II, Section 8). Any acreage proposed to be subdivided for residential or other use in this district
must be rezoned to the appropriate zoning classification.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Agriculture (row-crop), dairy farming, production of cattle, pork, poultry, aquaculture, horticulture, silviculture.
Farm stand.
Fishing pond- commercial and recreational.
Horse stable.
Hunting/ Fishing Camp.
Open air business.
Single-family residential of site-built or manufactured construction.
Rural business.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
175/227
9.
10.
11.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
1.
Commercial kennels provided they adhere to minimum setbacks defined for medium-density farm animal operations.
Housing for migrant labor as regulated by state and federal guidelines.
Packing sheds, feed mills, pecan shelling facilities, fertilizer mixing plants, etc.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
[The] applicant should document that less than half of the acreage proposed for conversion is prime farmland, or that the proposed site
is not suitable for agriculture due to adjoining land uses, or that the use is in support of on-going agriculture activities on the farm where the
use is located.
Airfield.
Bed and Breakfast Inn.
Cemetery (church affiliated or commercial).
Church.
Day care for adults or children.
Fraternal organization/private club.
Government-owned building.
Group home.
Hospital located on a state route.
Kennel.
Recreational and/or cultural uses of a commercial nature, located on a state route.
RV campground or camp site located on state route.
School, accredited nursery school and higher grades, located on state route.
Tower, transmission or receiving, for radio, cellular telephone, etc.
Any agricultural activity proposed which exceeds 50% of the threshold for concentrated animal feedlot operations
requiring a water quality control permit from the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of
Natural Resources.
Land application of municipal or industrial waste.
Landfills.
Sec. 4. - Conicts.
By their very nature, some agricultural activities generate noise, odor and insects detrimental to nearby land uses/occupants. To the
extent which these conflicts are a function of size of the specific agricultural activity, the adverse or negative effects of some of these noises,
odors and insects can be mitigated somewhat by distance. For the purpose of mitigating said impacts, minimum distances between
agricultural activities and surrounding land uses are hereby established (Sections 5, 6 and 7) on the basis of low-density and high-density
agricultural operations.
Sec. 5. - Non-commercial farm animal operations.
Farm animal operations of sizes smaller or equal to the following thresholds are classified as non-commercial:
Dairy Cows 66
Ducks 500
Horses 50
Poultry 60,000
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
176/227
2.
3.
4.
5.
Sheep 1,000
Steers/Heifers 100
Swine 250
Turkeys 5,500
All non-commercial farm animal operations constructed or expanded shall construct all buildings and fencing used for animal
confinement (e.g., poultry house, farrowing house, milk parlor) at least 1,000 feet from the property line; provided, however,
that, upon approval of the Board of Commissioners of Macon County in accordance with the provisions of Article XX[XXI],
Section 11, a non-commercial farm animal operation may be constructed closer to an existing use if an agricultural adjacency
waiver is submitted in connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that
the property owner of the existing use understands that a farm animal operation is to be located adjacent to the owner's
property and that such use may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the land use on
his property if the farm animal operation is constructed closer to the use than provided for in the zoning code of Macon
County. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential effects on the
owner's property and he agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential effects. The
waiver shall state that permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement [to] not be [sic] bring
any action against the local government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such
effects. Such waiver shall be recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall
be binding on subsequent land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must
be signed by the owners of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien
holders, and all parties having a security interest of any kind in the property.
Confinement fencing is not to be confused with boundary fencing, the latter of which may be constructed along the right-of-way
and property line. The area between confinement fencing and boundary fencing may be used for row-crop, vegetable or orchard
production, or pasture. In the event said area is used for pasture, it shall not be stocked at a rate higher than recommended by
generally accepted animal husbandry practices for open grazing of the specific animal species.
Where said area is grazed, fencing, as necessary, shall be erected around any surface feature, e.g. bog, to prevent livestock from
congregating along boundary fencing adjacent to the property line. Livestock catch pens shall be allowed in this grazing area,
provided the specific site does not retain water.
Any site(s) used for temporary storage, or active or passive treatment, of any waste or by-product of a low-density farm animal
operation shall be located at least 300 feet from the property line, and 1,000 feet from existing dwellings. All handling and land
application of waste and by-products from the operation shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations.
Machinery and equipment used to ventilate animal confinement buildings must be installed in such a way that air removed
from said buildings is directed away from nearby existing developments and or housing.
Any development proposed for a site adjacent to an existing non-commercial farm animal operation shall be constructed at
least 1,000 feet from the adjoining property line when said development is adjacent to a non-commercial operation; provided,
however, that such proposed development may be constructed closer to an existing non-commercial farm animal operation if
an agricultural adjacency waiver is submitted in connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural
adjacency waiver shall state that the property owner understands that a farm animal operation is existing adjacent to the
owner's property and that such use may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the
land use on his property if the development is constructed closer to the animal farm operation than provided for in the zoning
code of Macon County. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential
effects on the owner's property and he agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential
effects. The waiver shall state that permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement not be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
177/227
6.
7.
1.
2.
bring any action against the local government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such
effects. Such waiver shall be recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall
be binding on subsequent land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must
be signed by the owners of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien
holders, and all parties having a security interest of any kind in the property.
All dead animals shall be disposed of by a method approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the Georgia
Department of Agriculture in a manner that does not adversely affect ground or surface water or create a public health
concern.
A farm animal operation that is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the requirements of all state,
federal and local laws, rules and regulations shall be presumed not to be a nuisance.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(02))
Sec. 6. - Low-density farm animal operations.
Farm animal operations between the following thresholds are classified as low density:
Dairy Cows 67 — 250
Ducks 501 — 1,500
Horses 51 — 150
Poultry 60,001 — 200,000
Sheep 1,001 — 3,000
Steers/Heifers 101 — 300
Swine 251 — 750
Turkeys 5,501 — 16,500
All low-density farm animal operations constructed or expanded shall construct all buildings and fencing used for animal
confinement (e.g. poultry house, farrowing house, milk parlor) at least 1,000 feet from the property line; provided, however,
that, upon approval of the Board of Commissioners of Macon County in accordance with the provisions of Article XX[XXI],
Section 11, a low-density farm animal operation may be constructed closer to an existing use if an agricultural adjacency
waiver is submitted in connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that
the property owner of the existing use understands that a farm animal operation is to be located adjacent to the owner's
property and that such use may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the land use on
his property if the farm animal operation is constructed closer to the use than provided for in the zoning code of Macon
County. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential effects on the
owner's property and he agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential effects. The
waiver shall state that permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement not bring any action
against the local government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such effects. Such
waiver shall be recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall be binding on
subsequent land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must be signed by
the owners of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien holders, and all
parties having a security interest of any kind in the property.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
178/227
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
Confinement fencing is not to be confused with boundary fencing, the latter of which may be constructed along the right-of-way
and property line. The area between confinement fencing and boundary fencing may be used for row-crop, vegetable or orchard
production, or pasture. In the event said area is used for pasture, it shall not be stocked at a rate higher than recommended by
generally accepted animal husbandry practices for open grazing of the specific animal species.
Where said area is grazed, fencing, as necessary, shall be erected around any surface feature, e.g. bog, to prevent livestock from
congregating along boundary fencing adjacent to the property line. Livestock catch pens shall be allowed in this grazing area,
provided the specific site does not retain water.
Any site(s) used for temporary storage, or active or passive treatment, of any waste or by-product of a low-density farm animal
operation shall be located at least 300 feet from the property line, and 1,000 feet from existing dwellings. All handling and land
application of waste and by-products from the operation shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations.
Machinery and equipment used to ventilate animal confinement buildings must be installed in such a way that air removed
from said buildings is directed away from nearby existing developments.
Any development proposed for a site adjacent to an existing low-density farm animal operation shall be constructed at least
1,000 feet from the adjoining property line when said development is adjacent to a low-density operation; provided, however,
that such proposed development may be constructed closer to an existing low-density farm animal operation if an agricultural
adjacency waiver is submitted in connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall
state that the property owner understands that a farm animal operation is existing adjacent to the owner's property and that
such use may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the land use on his property if the
development is constructed closer to the animal farm operation than provided for in the zoning code of Macon County. The
agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential effects on the owner's
property and he agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential effects. The waiver
shall state that permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement not be bring any action against
the local government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such effects. Such waiver shall
be recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall be binding on subsequent
land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must be signed by the owners
of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien holders, and all parties
having a security interest of any kind in the property.
All dead animals shall be disposed of by a method approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the Georgia
Department of Agriculture in a manner that does not adversely affect ground or surface water or create a public health
concern.
A farm animal operation that is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the requirements of all state,
federal and local laws, rules and regulations shall be presumed not to be a nuisance.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(02))
Sec. 7. - High-density farm animal operations.
Farm animal operations of exceeding the following thresholds are classified as high density:
Dairy Cows 250
Ducks 1,500
Horses 150
Poultry 200,000
Sheep 3,000
Steers/Heifers 300
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
179/227
2.
3.
4.
5.
Swine 750
Turkeys 16,500
All high-density farm animal operations constructed or expanded shall construct farm buildings and fencing used for animal
confinement (e.g. poultry house, farrowing house, milking parlor) at least 2,500 feet from the property line; provided, however,
that, upon approval of the Board of Commissioners of Macon County in accordance with Article XX[XXI], Section 11, a highdensity farm animal operation may be constructed closer to an existing use if an agricultural adjacency waiver is submitted in
connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that the property owner of
the existing use understands that a farm animal operation is to be located adjacent to the owner's property and that such use
may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the land use on his property if the farm
animal operation is constructed closer to the use than provided for in the zoning code of Macon County. The agricultural
adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential effects on the owner's property and he
agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential effects. The waiver shall state that
permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement not be bring any action against the local
government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such effects. Such waiver shall be
recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall be binding on subsequent
land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must be signed by the owners
of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien holders, and all parties
having a security interest of any kind in the property.
Confinement fencing is not to be confused with boundary fencing, the latter of which may be constructed along the right-of-way
and property line. The area between confinement fencing and boundary fencing may be used for row-crop, vegetable or orchard
production, or pasture. In the event said area is used for pasture it shall not be stocked at a rate higher than recommended by
generally accepted animal husbandry practices for open grazing of the specific animal species.
Where said area is grazed, fencing, as necessary, shall be erected around any surface feature, e.g., bog, to prevent livestock from
congregating along boundary fencing adjacent to the property line. Livestock catch pens shall be allowed in this grazing area
provided the specific site does not retain water.
Any site(s) used for temporary storage, or active or passive treatment, of any waste or by-product of a high-density farm
animal operation shall be located at least 500 feet from road property line and 1,500 feet from an existing dwelling. All
handling and land application of waste and by-products from the operation shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations.
Machinery and equipment used to ventilate animal confinement buildings must be installed in such a way that air removed
from said buildings is directed away from nearby existing developments and/or housing.
Any development proposed for a site adjacent to an existing high-density farm animal operation shall be constructed at least
2,500 feet from the adjoining property line when said development is adjacent to a high-density operation; provided, however,
that such proposed development may be constructed closer to an existing high-density farm animal operation if an
agricultural adjacency waiver is submitted in connection with the application for a building permit. The agricultural adjacency
waiver shall state that the property owner understands that a farm animal operation is existing adjacent to the owner's
property and that such use may produce noise, odors, dust and other effects that may not be compatible with the land use on
his property if the development is constructed closer to the animal farm operation than provided for in the zoning code of
Macon County. The agricultural adjacency waiver shall state that despite such, the owner understands the potential effects on
the owner's property and he agrees to sign the agricultural adjacency waiver waiving any objection to such potential effects.
The waiver shall state that permits will only be issued and processed in reliance on the owner's agreement not be bring any
action against the local government and adjacent property owner operating the animal farm operation for any such effects.
Such waiver shall be recorded in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Macon County and shall be
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
180/227
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
binding on subsequent land owners. In addition to the holder or holders of fee simple title to the property, the waiver must be
signed by the owners of any interest whatsoever in the property, including, without limitation, security deed holders, lien
holders, and all parties having a security interest of any kind in the property.
All dead animals shall be disposed of by a method approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the Georgia
Department of Agriculture in a manner that does not adversely affect ground or surface water or create a public health
concern.
Any farm animal operations exceeding the following thresholds are considered to be conditional uses subject to review,
evaluation and permitting by the Macon County Board of Commissioners:
Dairy Cows 2,100
Ducks 5,000
Horses 1,500
Poultry 375,000
Sheep 30,000
Steers/Heifers 3,000
Swine 7,500
No high-density farm animal operation shall be constructed within one mile of the corporate limits of the Cities of Ideal,
Marshallville, Montezuma, Oglethorpe or Andersonville as said corporate limits exist at the time the permit for construction is
issued or within one mile of the property lines of the Andersonville National Historic Site or Massey Lane Gardens.
All dead animals shall be disposed of by a method approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the Georgia
Department of Agriculture in a manner that does not adversely affect ground or surface water or create a public health
concern.
A farm animal operation that is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the requirements of all state,
federal and local laws, rules and regulations shall be presumed not to be a nuisance.
(Ord. of 3-1-2011(02))
Sec. 8. - Rural business uses permitted, prohibited and development standards.
A rural business shall be secondary or incidental to the primary use of property for agricultural or residential purposes. Such business
shall be primarily directed toward providing local or neighborhood services to rural-residential areas. Rural businesses are intended to be of
smaller size, intensity and scale than commercial uses that would be more commonly found in a commercial district. Rural businesses shall
be similar to home occupations except that the activity can occur in an accessory structure detached from the residence. In addition, an
applicant for a rural business permit must be residing on the subject property prior to any application being filed for consideration by the
Zoning Commission, and must maintain residency thereon throughout the period the business continues to operate.
Sec. 8-a. - Permitted uses.
Offices.
Beauty shops and barber shops.
Retail sales or services of a specialty nature; antique shops, specialty foods, custom furniture, upholstery shops, tailoring,
taxidermist, custom made sporting goods, meat cutting as a retail service to the public.
Small repair shops for appliances, machinery, farm equipment or automobiles with the following limitations:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
181/227
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
1.
2.
3.
4.
Repair shops shall not create noise, noxious odors, bothersome illumination, traffic levels or any hazard which would
adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the adjoining property owners or neighborhood in general.
Outdoor storage of inoperable machinery, equipment or vehicles shall be prohibited.
All spare parts (new or used) shall be stored within an enclosed structure, and the storage space shall be included in the
total space allocated for the rural business.
Small businesses similar to the above, as approved by the Zoning Commission.
Sec. 8-b. - Prohibited uses.
Service stations, retail sale of gasoline, automated or do it yourself car washes.
Truck terminals, heavy equipment rental.
Industrial or manufacturing uses which require specialized equipment not ordinarily associated with agricultural and
residential uses (e.g., forges, large milling machines, poultry or meat processing or packing equipment (except as provided for
above)).
Drive-in theaters, restaurants, entertainment facilities, skating rinks or any use which as a result of its normal operation would
generate levels of vehicular traffic uncommon in the vicinity of the proposed development.
Any use which is clearly out of scale or character with an agricultural and sparsely developed residential area.
Sec. 8-c. - Development standards.
The following standards shall apply to all rural businesses:
A permitted, rural business shall be valid only as long as the original petitioner owns and operates the business and
maintains a valid business license. The rural business use permit is not transferable. The rural business use permit shall
become void upon expiration of the business license. Any subsequent owner of property previously permitted for a rural
business use must apply to the Zoning Commission for a rural business use permit.
The property containing the site of the rural business must also be the bona fide residence of the petitioner/business
owner.
A rural business shall be located on property containing at least one (1) acre of land, and the site upon which the
business is actually conducted shall not exceed one-half acre of land.
Only one (1) non-illuminated sign, limited to a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet, shall be permitted. This sign may
have two (2) faces of up to sixteen (16) square feet each, back to back, sharing the same set of supports.
Adequate off-street parking must be provided for residents, employees and business visitors.
Sec. 8-d. - Exemptions.
The following standards shall apply to all rural businesses unless the petitioner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Commission that exemption from one or more of the standards will not result in adverse impacts on surrounding property(ies). A
modification of the following standards shall be permitted only if:
There are special and unusual topographic conditions unique to the property or structure; or
The proposed use is clearly of such a small scale, and will remain at such small scale that conducting or operating the
business would not be obvious or noticeable from the adjoining property or by the public in general; and
If the intent of the rural business is maintained:
The rural business must be located to the side or rear of the principal residence on the property.
Neither the structure in which the rural business is housed, nor the grounds on which rural business activity is
performed, shall contain equipment which would not ordinarily be found in accessory structures in an
agricultural/residential district.
The structure shall be readily and easily usable for customary agricultural and residential uses.
The architectural style shall be in keeping with surrounding agricultural and residential development.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
182/227
5.
6.
1.
1.
1.
2.
3.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3
A rural business shall not exceed 15,000 square feet of gross floor area.
A rural business shall have no more than twenty-five employees who do not reside in the principal residence onsite.
ARTICLE V[VI]. - RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The Rural Residential District is intended to provide residents housing choice in rural areas of the county by allowing residential
development in those areas where prime farmland is less prevalent. Although agriculture is the predominant land use in this district, and is
encouraged to remain so, and significant prime farmland acreage is present, this natural resource is much less concentrated than in the AG
district. Hence, residents can be afforded significant rural housing choice with limited adverse impact on prime farmland acreage. Minimum
lot size is two (2) acres.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
All uses permitted in the AG district.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
All uses conditioned in the AG—1 district.
Sec. 4. - Exemption provision.
Any persons or corporate entities owning real property containing at least one (1) acre at the time of the effective date of this ordinance
shall be fully marketable and should not be subject to the two (2) acre minimum.
ARTICLE VI[VII]. - RIVER PROTECTION DISTRICT (RP)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The River Protection district is created in recognition of the natural resources which make positive contributions to the local quality of
life. These resources must be protected from the development they so often attract.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Agricultural row-crop, timber production and harvesting, and other activities consistent therewith. None of the acreage in
forest land/woodland at the time this ordinance becomes effective shall be converted to any use other than forest
land/woodland or agriculture row-crop, except as provided herein below.
Single-family residential.
Hunting and fishing lodges/camps.
Sec. 3. - Limitations on development.
The following thresholds shall apply to development in the River Protection zone.
On parcels of public record of three acres or less as of the effective date of this ordinance, a maximum of one (1) acre
may be developed.
The maximum developable area on parcels of public record as of the effective date of this ordinance which are greater
than three acres and up to fifty (50) acres is 1.5 acres.
The maximum developable area on parcels of public record as of the effective date of this ordinance which are greater
than fifty (50) acres is 2.5%, not to exceed ten (10) acres.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
183/227
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
4.
5.
6.
6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.4.
6.5.
6.6.
7.
8.
No improved roads shall be constructed. All existing, interior roads must maintain a dirt or gravel surface.
Harvest of forests and all other silvicultural practices shall conform to the Best Management Practices for Forestry as
published by the Georgia Forestry Commission.
Row-crop agricultural activities shall conform to Best Management Practices for Agriculture as published by the Georgia Soil
and Water Conservation Commission.
ARTICLE VII[VIII]. - SITE-BUILT RESIDENTIAL (R-1)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The Single-Family Residential district is established to encourage development of conventionally constructed ("stick-built" on-site), singlefamily, detached housing, and to discourage developments which would generate traffic levels and patterns on neighborhood roads in
conflict with single-family residential development. Minimum lot size is one (1) acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Single-family residence constructed on-site.
Accessory buildings or uses (swimming pool, greenhouse, etc.) incidental to permitted use(s) when located on the same lot and
not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation.
Home occupations.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
Bed and Breakfast.
Churches, exclusive of cemeteries.
Clubs and fraternal organizations (non-profit) provided:
Buildings are constructed at least fifty feet from all property lines; and
A buffer strip at least ten (10) feet deep is planted along side and rear lot lines;
The development fronts a state highway.
Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, residences for aged persons, orphanages, group homes, half-way
homes and personal care homes.
Public (governmental-owned) buildings and structures.
Recreational developments including, but not limited to lakes, swimming pools, golf courses, and golf driving ranges, subject to
Zoning Commission approval of the developer's comprehensive site development plan which must include:
Site map of not less than 1" = 400' scale;
The location and function of all buildings;
Proposed modifications of the natural landscape;
Location and surface treatment of all roadways;
Details of drinking water and sanitary facilities;
A timetable for build-out.
Schools (state certified/licensed) from nursery and day care through high school located on a state highway.
Towers for radio transmission and reception, not to exceed 180 feet high, and limited to the sole use of the resident.
ARTICLE VIII[IX]. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT (R-2)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
184/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
The Manufactured Residential District is established to provide for medium and higher density residential development a greater degree
of housing choice than is permitted in the Single Family Residential District, housing choice and variety. Minimum lot size is one (1) acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Single-family residential; site-built and manufactured.
Modular housing.
Home occupation.
All uses permitted in the R-1 zone.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
Art, music, photographic, or dance studio.
Boarding home.
Cemetery (church affiliated).
Duplex.
Mobile home park.
Mobile home subdivision.
Mortuary.
Multi-family residential development—built on-site or modular (triplex, townhouse, apartment, etc.).
Professional office.
All uses conditioned in the R-1 zone.
ARTICLE IX[X]. - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The intent of the R-3 Residential District is to provide for higher density residential development; to provide for variety in the county
housing stock, and to encourage neighborhood maintenance and preservation.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Any use permitted in the R-2 residential districts.
Duplexes.
Multiple family dwellings.
Condominiums.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
All uses conditioned in the R-2 district.
ARTICLE X[XI]. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (R-4)
An ordinance to prescribe the manner in which a Manufactured Home Park may be created and operated in Macon County for the
health, safety, and welfare of those who reside in said park, for the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens of Macon
County, and to provide certain standards and criteria so the health, safety, and welfare of all citizens may be preserved.
Sec. 1. - Denitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
185/227
1.
2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
2.8.
[3.]
[4.]
[5.]
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
Manufactured Home: A structure, built and transportable in one or more sections on a permanent chassis/running gear, and
used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing,
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured Homes shall be constructed in accordance with the Ma
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
Manufactured Home Park: A parcel of land planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured
homes for non-transient use and occupancy or for rental occupancy. A conditional use permit shall be required for the
establishment of a manufactured home park. The term "park" includes the term "community." Every manufactured home
park shall [be as follows]:
Be suitable for year round occupancy;
Be placed on permanent masonry foundation or other substantial foundation that will comply with the Georgia
Minimum Building Code and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., which provides for the installation of manufactured homes,
for the erection and support of manufactured homes and to be substantially fixed to its site also in compliance with
the Georgia Minimum Building Code and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.;
Be connected to a water system approved by, either the Macon County Health Department, or the Georgia
Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as the case may be, and present to the County
Inspector a letter or certification of such approval; and
Be connected to an approved waste disposal system approved by, either the Macon County Health Department, or
the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as the case may be, and present
to the County Inspector a letter or certification of such approval; and
Have all electrical supply systems and connections that comply with the current Georgia State Minimum Electric
Code; and
Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other plan material substantially equal to or better than one-family dwelling
within five hundred (500) feet.
The area between the bottom perimeter of the manufactured home and the ground shall be covered with material
that is suitable and adequately functional to adequately protect the underside of the manufactured home and to
keep the manufactured home from being unsightly. The owner of the manufactured home is responsible for the
skirting. Skirting shall be installed only after the inspection of the manufactured home by the County Inspector and
a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued. The skirting shall then be installed within thirty (30) days of the issuance
of the Certificate of Occupancy.
All electrical, plumbing, and heating and air connections, improvements and repairs shall be made by an individual
licensed by the State of Georgia.
Mobile Home: A generic term for a factory-built dwelling unit built on a permanent chassis, made to be readily
transportable on its own running gear in one or more sections totaling no less than three hundred twenty (320) square
feet which is subject to the Georgia Motor Vehicle Title Registration Act, meeting the construction and safety standards of
the national code administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and manufactured prior to
June 15, 1976. Mobile homes do not satisfy current building codes. The term does not include "recreational vehicle."
Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of not more than
one mobile home of single-family occupancy.
Modular Home: A factory fabricated transportable (carted) building consisting of building units designed to be
incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation as a permanent structure with the appearance of a
conventional, on-site constructed building and to be used for residential purposes. A modular home is not a mobile
home. Every modular home shall [be as follows]:
Be suitable for year round occupancy;
Be placed on a permanent masonry foundation or other substantial foundation that will comply with the Georgia
Minimum Building Code for the erection and support of modular homes, and to be substantially fixed to its site also
in compliance with the Georgia Minimum Building Code;
Be connected to a water system approved by, either the Macon County Health Department, or the Georgia
Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as the case may be, and present to the County
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
186/227
5.4.
5.5.
5.6.
5.7.
5.8.
5.9.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Inspector a letter or certification of such approval; and
Be connected to an approved waste disposal system approved by, either the Macon County Health Department, or
the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, as the case may be, and present
to the County Inspector a letter or certification of such approval;
Have all electrical supply systems and connections that comply with the current Georgia State Minimum Electric
Code; and
Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other plan material substantially equal to or better than one-family dwelling
within five hundred (500) feet;
Meet the General construction and safety standards of the latest edition of the Georgia State Minimum Building
Codes;
The areas between the bottom perimeter of the modular home and the ground shall be covered with material that
is suitable and adequately functional to adequately protect the underside of the modular home and to keep the
modular home from being unsightly. The owner of the modular home is responsible for skirting. The skirting shall
be installed only after the inspection of the modular home by the County Inspector and a Certificate of Occupancy
have been issued. The skirting shall then be installed within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy;
All electrical, plumbing, and heating and air connections, improvements and repairs shall be made by an individual
licensed by the State of Georgia.
Service Building: A building, housing facilities such as recreational, maintenance, laundry, and office structures necessary
to the successful development and management of a modular home park.
Travel Trailer: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable structure used to
designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreational, or other trip and provided with
sleeping accommodations. The travel trailer shall not be used for permanent housing or a permanent residence.
Rent or Rental: The term "rent" or "rental" shall mean any enumeration whether in money, barter, or kind, that is given or
received as consideration for the occupancy of a mobile home, modular home or manufactured home, or the occupancy
of a tract, space or parcel of land upon which a mobile home is situate.
Set Up: Preparing the manufactured home, modular home or mobile home for occupancy by installing the unit pursuant
to applicable state statute, attaching the unit to utilities as opposed to placing the mobile home in inventory or in
temporary storage.
Sec. 2. - Conict with other regulations.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open space, or an imposed
other restrictive standards that are required in or under any other statute or ordinance, the regulations and requirements of
this chapter shall govern.
Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this
chapter, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern.
Sec. 3. - Application for permission to develop or maintain a manufactured home park.
It shall be unlawful for any person to develop or maintain a manufactured home park in the county unless it is duly permitted
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
The manufactured home park shall be approved by the County Building Inspector before a permit is issued.
The application for the development of a manufactured home park shall have attached to the application proof that all Macon
County taxes due Macon County from the applicant have been paid in full, and no permit may be issued until all taxes due
from the applicant are paid in full.
The County Inspector may recommend approval of a planned manufactured home park when all conditions precedent to this
chapter have been met.
An application and all accompanying plans and supporting data shall be filed in triplicate with the County Inspector at least
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
187/227
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.
5.5.
5.6.
1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.
2.
3.
4.
thirty (30) days prior to a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners. The application shall be in writing, and it shall
include the following information:
The name and address of the applicant;
The location and description of the boundaries of the property intended for planned manufactured home park
development;
A complete manufactured home park plan showing all existing conditions and proposed site development as required in
this section including preliminary plans of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed
within the manufactured home park (on a topographic map). Such plan shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals
not more than one hundred (100) feet;
Any other information reasonably required by the County Inspector to determine the proposed park's compliance with
legal requirements;
The application should be verified by the County Inspector and the Board of Commissioners are authorized to revoke the
manufactured permit in the event any false statements are made on the application;
Proof that an application has been made to the Health Department for approval of the manufactured home park, or
proof that approval of the Health Department has been obtained.
Sec. 4. - Dimensional and site development requirements (manufactured home park plan).
The manufactured home park plan shall show or propose all requirements listed in this article and, in addition, all such
requirements shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. The manufactured home park shall, at a
minimum, conform to the following:
Frontage and Area: A manufactured home park shall front for at least one hundred (100) feet on a county or state road
and shall be approve as to design by the Board of Commissioners prior to operation.
Entrance and Exits: The entrances and exits to the manufactured home park shall be from a county or state road. All
entrance and exit streets have a right-of-way width of at sixty (60) feet and a surface width of at least twenty-eight (28)
feet and a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from the public thoroughfare extending into the park, and after the
first one hundred (100) feet shall be deemed an interior street.
Park Boundaries: A manufactured home park shall be bounded with a ten (10) foot buffer strip all of the exterior property
lines of the park not bounding a county or state road. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs
that grow at least eight (8) feet in height and provide a visual screen.
Sec. 5. - Minimum number of manufactured home spaces.
Any legal entity that owns and rents two or more spaces shall be required to obtain a permit and will be subject to the terms of this
Ordinance.
Sec. 6. - Yard requirements.
Each space shall be at least fifty-two (52) feet wide and clearly defined.
There shall be a twenty-foot (20) side yard. Side yard being the space parallel to the longest dimension of the home.
There shall be a forty-foot (40) minimum distance between homes, side-to-side and a forty- (40) foot minimum distance
between homes, end-to-end.
No manufactured home shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any street and within the park or within forty (40)
feet of any exterior public street.
Sec. 7. - Design approval.
The manufactured home park applicant shall submit with the application a layout of the proposed manufactured home park which layout
shall be prepared by registered surveyor or engineer and shall show the location and number of manufactured homes in said park along with
street design.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
188/227
1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.
2.
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.
2.
Sec. 8. - Drainage.
The park shall be located on a well-drained and properly graded site. The site drainage improvements shall meet the requirements of the
State.
Sec. 9. - Interior streets and drives.
All manufactured home parks shall contain a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and
shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway in accordance with requirements of the county. The following
requirements shall apply to the development of a park's street system:
All interior streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least (40) forty feet unless a greater width for drainage purposes in
required. The minimum surface width shall be twenty-two (22) feet for an interior street;
All park streets shall be provided with a smooth, graveled all-weather surface having a minimum width of twenty-two (22)
feet which shall be durable and well-drained under normal weather conditions;
All park streets shall be maintained by the park owner in a state of good repair at all times;
Street base and surface construction materials shall be as required by the county's street and road standards. Written
approval of the street system by the County Inspector shall be required before the first manufactured home building
permit will be issued;
Driveways individual spaces shall be at least eight (8) feet in width;
All structures located on the space shall observe the required set back and distance requirements.
Sec. 10. - O-drive parking.
No automobile parking shall be permitted on that portion of the interior street system designated as the entrance or exit
portion and being that portion of the street that is sixty (60) feet in width and one hundred (100) feet deep as measured from
the major public thoroughfare.
At least two automobile spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space. The parking spaces shall be provided on
the individual spaces or on street parking lanes or on an off street parking lot that is located within two hundred (200) feet of
the manufactured home spaces the parking lot serves.
Sec. 11. - Signs.
The following non-flashing and non-animated signs are required under the conditions specified:
Park identification sign: One (1) park identification sign shall be required not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in the
area for the purpose of denoting the name of the manufactured home park.
Manufactured home lot identification sign: One (1) manufactured home lot identification sign not exceeding one (1)
square foot in area shall be required for each manufactured home lot. Such sign shall indicate the name, address, and lot
number of the occupant of the manufactured home.
Street Signs: All streets in the manufactured home park shall be named in conformity with the County Ordinance and
street signs shall be erected at the park owner's expense. The sign identifying the lot shall be visible from the street.
Visibility: No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of street lines with one another or
the edge of driveways with street lines.
Sec. 12. - Improvements to manufactured home and manufactured home spaces.
Any addition to any manufactured home located within a manufactured home park shall be free-standing, self-supporting, and
built in conformity with the Georgia Minimum Housing Code.
Each manufactured home space shall be given a lot number and accordingly marked to be visible from the street providing
access thereto.
Sec. 13. - Special conditions and safeguards.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
189/227
1.
1.1
1.2
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.7.
In recommending approval of any planned manufactured home park, the Board of Commissioners may attach special conditions and
safeguards to protect both the occupants of the park and the occupants of surrounding property, including such matters as protection
against noise, lights, dust, and fire. Where required to serve these ends, walls, planting, surfacing, or other natural or artificial means for
protection may be required as a part of such special conditions on which the recommendation for approval of a manufactured home park is
based. Failure to meet such conditions shall be grounds for refusal of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Sec. 14. - Minimum size and sanitation facilities of manufactured homes.
No manufactured home located within a manufactured home park which has less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet off floor space
and which does not contain a built-in bathroom with water, closet, lavatory and shower or tub which are in working condition, shall be placed
in a planned manufactured home park.
Sec. 15. - Lighting.
All interior drives and walkways within the manufactured home park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps spaced at intervals of no
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Such lighting shall meet the minimum requirements of the state manufactured home regulations.
Sec. 16. - Refuse collection facilities.
Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a sanitary method of solid waste collection and disposal meeting the requirements
of the county and state.
Sec. 17. - Service buildings.
Service buildings such as shelters, restrooms, management offices and storage facilities are permitted in each manufactured
home park and are subject to the following requirements:
Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross land area of the park;
All service buildings shall be required to conform to the county building, plumbing and electrical codes adopted by the
county.
Sec. 18. - Existing mobile home parks.
Any additions to or expansions to any existing Mobile Home Park as of 11/01/98 shall be subject to the terms of this ordinance.
At such time as the title to any mobile home park is transferred, except as security for loans, the terms of the Mobile Home
Park Ordinance and all revisions will apply to the transferee and to the mobile home park, and the parties shall comply as
follows:
The Transferor and Transferee are required to notify the County Building Inspector of the transfer of title.
The requirements stated in this Mobile Home Ordinance may be submitted prior to the transfer of title, or may be
submitted after the transfer of title, they shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of the transfer of title.
An inventory of the mobile home park will be made to determine the areas of the park that do not conform to the Mobile
Home Park Ordinance. The inventory shall be submitted to the County Building Inspector.
Also submitted to the County Building Inspector will be an itemized estimated cost that will be incurred to bring the
mobile home park into compliance with the then current Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
The County Building Inspector will review the inventory and itemized cost and identify those changes that are necessary
for health or safety reasons.
The County Building Inspector will review the inventory and list the changes required for health or safety reasons and the
practical and inexpensive changes that can be made to bring the mobile home park into compliance.
If the Transferee accepts the changes recommended by the County Building Inspector, the changes will be incorporated
into a plan for renovation. If the Transferee does not accept the changes recommended by the County Building Inspector,
the transferee may appeal the recommended changes to the Board of Commissioners within five (5) days of the County
Inspector's recommendations.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
190/227
1.8.
1.9.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.
2.
3.
1.
Once the list of the changes is final, the Transferee will proceed to create and prepare a plan for renovations and will make t
to the mobile home park. The time for completion of the renovations will be set by the County Building Inspector, and will d
extent of the work and the availability of material and labor. Extensions may be granted upon written request detailing the r
extension.
The owner of each and every mobile home park in Macon County, shall comply with the requirements of Section 22 of
this Ordinance [article].
Sec. 19. - Skirting.
All owners or developers of manufactured home parks and all mobile homes erected or set up shall have skirting around the entire
home.
Sec. 20. - Development compliance.
At least one hundred (100) percent of each phase, enlargement or expansion of all planned spaces, as well as all streets,
utilities, and other required improvements necessary to serve them pursuant to this chapter shall be completely constructed
according to the manufactured home park plan approved by the Board of Commissioners before the first manufactured home
building permit will be issued.
Failure of the developer or applicant to construct this minimum phase within two (2) years after approval by the Board of
Commissioners shall cause such approval to expire.
Sec. 21. - Inspection.
The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of manufactured
home parks located within the county, in order that such inspector may perform the duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of occupants of manufactured home parks and of the general public.
The building inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose
of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter.
The building inspector shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all manufactured homes and
occupants using the manufactured home park.
It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of manufactured home parks, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the
building inspector free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park to give the owner thereof, or the owner's agent or
employee, access to any part of such manufactured home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purposes of making
such repairs of alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the chapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 22. - Decal required.
All persons owning a manufactured home located in Macon County on January 1st of each year shall obtain from the Tax
Commissioner a decal before April 1st, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493. This requirement pertains to all manufactured
homes and mobile homes, including those exempted from taxation by homestead exemption, or other provisions of state law.
The decal shall be affixed to each manufactured home and mobile home in such manner as to cause the decal to be easily
visible for inspection.
Owners of manufactured homes locating their homes, and owners of mobile homes relocating their homes in Macon County
after January 1st of any year shall be required to report the location of their home to the Tax Commissioners Office and the
Building Inspector within ten (10) working days.
Sec. 23. - Title reports by manufactured home park operators.
Every owner and operator of a manufactured home park is required to give to the County Inspector an inventory of all
manufactured homes located in the park sixty (60) days from the effective date of this ordinance. Subsequent Inventories shall
be delivered to the County Inspector by January 20th of each succeeding year.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
191/227
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.
2.
Every owner, manager, and operator of a manufactured home park is required to report to the County Inspector any manufactur
moved into the mobile home park after January 1st of each year.
Every owner, manager, and operator of a manufactured home park and changes to the map shall be reported by January 20th
of each year.
Every owner, manager, and operator of a manufactured/mobile home park is required to notify the County Inspector of any
change in ownership or any change in the name of any park within thirty (30) days of such change.
The County Inspector will notify the Tax Commissioner of the information that has been furnished to him by the owner and
operator of the park as may be needed by the Tax Commissioner for the updating of the Tax Commissioner's records.
This section applies to all manufactured home and mobile home park owners, including those in existence prior to the
adoption of the original mobile home park ordinance.
Sec. 24. - Manufactured home installation.
Prior to the installation and set up of a manufactured home in a manufactured home park located in Macon County, the
person or legal entity planning to install the manufactured home, or the owner of the home, shall apply for, and receive, a
permit to install the manufactured home in Macon County. The requirements for the installation and set up of a manufactured
home in Macon County are as follows:
Proof that an application has been made for a well and septic tank, or proof the well and septic tank has been accepted
by the County Health Department, or proof that the manufactured home will be served by an EPD approved water and/or
sewage system.
Proof that an installer licensed by the State of Georgia as per O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164, will install the manufactured home.
Proof that the manufactured home has been registered with the Macon County Tax Commissioner.
Evidence of ownership of the lot where the manufactured home will be installed and if not owned of the manufactured
home, evidence of a rental agreement, or some other agreement signed by the property owner.
The manufactured home shall be installed in compliance with the installation of manufactured home requirements as
stated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., and as amended.
Sec. 25. - Certicate of occupancy.
No newly installed manufactured home in Macon County will be occupied until the County Inspector has issued a Certificate of
Occupancy. The requirements of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy are as follows:
Compliance with the Rules and Regulations of the "Uniform Standards Code for Manufacturer's Home Act" (O.C.G.A. § 8-
2-10 et seq., and as amended).
Inspection by the County Building Inspector for compliance with the applicable ordinances.
Sec[s]. 26 to 30. - Reserved.
Sec. 31. - Penalties and incentives.
Failure to Obtain a Permit. If any person commences a manufactured home park without first obtaining a permit, the person
shall be subject to revocation of any permit or other authorization received from the County and associated with the
establishment of the manufactured home park.
Stop Work Orders. Upon notice from the County Inspector, work on the manufactured home contrary to the provision of this
ordinance, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent, or the person or persons in charge of constructing the manufactured
home park on the property, and shall state the conditions which shall be met before a permit is issued.
ARTICLE XI[XII]. - MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION (R-5)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
192/227
1.
2.
1.
1.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1
2
1
2
1.
2.
The Manufactured Home Subdivision district is for planned development designed to accommodate manufactured home residency by
homeowners. The owner/developer(s) must petition the Zoning Commission to rezone the subject parcel to R-5. If after an appropriately
advertised public hearing the subject parcel is rezoned R-5, the developer must submit to the Zoning Commission a complete site plan for
approval prior to any development taking place on the site. Minimum lot size per residence is one (1) acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Single-family, detached residences of manufactured construction.
Any use permitted in the single-family residential (R-1 & R-2) districts.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
Any uses conditioned in the single-family residential (R-1 & R-2) districts.
Sec. 4. - Minimum yard requirements.
Yard requirements shall be the same as in the single-family residential (R-1 & R-2) districts.
Sec. 5. - Minimum improvements.
A manufactured home shall be placed on a concrete block foundation with poured concrete footing sixteen (16) inches by
sixteen (16) inches by four inches thick. Skirting or under-pinning of fiberglass, metal or masonry materials shall be placed so
as to completely enclose the understructure.
Wind-load anchors (tie-downs) capable of sustaining wind velocities of seventy (70) miles per hour shall be installed.
All manufactured homes must have a HUD approved plate or sticker and comply with applicable codes of the county and state.
The roadway system in manufactured home subdivisions shall be maintained under private ownership with grading
improvements, drainage improvements, road base and road paving improvements all in conformance with county road
development specifications. All interior streets shall have a minimum paved surface of ten (10) feet for one-way streets and
twenty-two (22) feet for two-way streets.
ARTICLE XII[XIII]. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RVP)
Regulations in the RVP district are established for recreational vehicle parks where the principal use is for overnight tourists or for
vacationers whose stay will not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
Sec. 1. - Area requirements, minimum.
The park shall be on a lot of not less than five (5) acres, with a width at the building line of not less than three hundred (300)
feet.
The density of spaces shall not exceed nine (9) per acre without a community water system approved by the county health
department.
Sec. 2. - Yard requirements.
Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other by not less than fifteen (15) feet.
No recreational vehicle shall be located closer to any exterior property line than the corresponding yard requirement in the
surrounding or adjoining district in which it is located.
Sec. 3. - Minimum requirements.
Each space within a recreational vehicle park shall be provided with an all-weather surface of sufficient area to provide parking
for both trailer and towing vehicle. All other exposed ground surfaces shall be covered or protected with a vegetative growth
that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust.
Water supply connections shall be made to a public water system wherever possible and feasible, as determined by the county
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
193/227
3.
4.
5.
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
health department. Where a public system is not available, a private system approved by the county health department may
be used.
The water supply shall be capable of supplying fifty (50) gallons per space per day for all spaces lacking individual water
connections and one hundred (100) gallons per day for all spaces provided with individual water connections.
Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with at least one (1) water supply station per one hundred (100) trailer sites, or
fraction thereof. Such water supply outlet shall include at least one sanitary hydrant and necessary appurtenances, and shall
be protected against back flow and back-siphonage.
Connection shall be made to a public sanitary sewerage system whenever possible and feasible, as determined by the county
health department. Where a public system is not available, a private system approved by the county health department, and
where applicable, the Georgia Water Quality Control Board may be used. No septic tanks are permitted.
Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a sanitary station in the ratio of at least one (1) station for each one
hundred (100) trailer spaces or fraction thereof, and each station shall be separated from any recreational vehicle space
by a distance of at least fifty (50) feet.
A sanitary station shall consist of at least a trapped four-inch sewer riser pipe connected to the park's sewerage system,
surrounded at the inlet end by a concrete apron sloped to the drain, and provided with a suitable hinged cover, and
water outlet, with the necessary appurtenances to permit periodic wash down of the immediate area.
No wastewater or other liquid effluent shall be discharged or allowed to accumulate on the ground surface.
Grounded and weatherproof electrical outlets supplying at least one hundred ten (110) volts shall be provided at each
recreational vehicle space. All electrical facilities shall comply with the regulations of the National Electrical Code.
At least one (1) solid waste container approved by the county health department shall be provided for each recreational
vehicle space.
Where dependent trailers are to be located, central toilet facilities shall be provided. Central toilets shall be plainly marked,
separated by sex, lighted at night, and located within two hundred (200) feet of the trailer spaces served. For each ten (10)
spaces or every fraction thereof, not less than one (1) commode, one (1) lavatory, and one (1) tub or shower head shall be
provided for each sex. In addition, for each twenty (20) trailer spaces or fraction thereof, at least one (1) urinal shall be
provided in each central toilet designated for men.
All-weather drives at least twenty (20) feet wide shall be provided to each trailer space within the park.
A permanent, protective screen as described herein shall be required.
Sec. 4. - General requirements.
Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insects and rodents. Extermination methods and other
measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with requirements of the county health department.
The park area shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, and other noxious plants considered to
be detrimental to health.
No open fire shall be permitted, except in facilities designed for such purposes. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel
shall be used, nor material burned, which causes odors or dense smoke.
The person to whom approval is given to operate a recreational vehicle park shall at all times operate the park in compliance
with this resolution, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park area, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
Every operator of a travel trailer park shall maintain a register as required by Georgia State Law.
Every park operator shall notify the local health authority immediately of any suspended communicable or contagious disease
within the park area. In the case of disease diagnosed by a physical as quarantinable, the departure of the trailer or its
occupants or the removal of any articles, which have been exposed to infection, is prohibited.
ARTICLE XIII[XIV]. - LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
194/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
The C-1 district is intended to permit retail business and service uses that are needed to serve nearby residential areas. Uses are
prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The
intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations proposed in the future land use plan to the
advantage of consumers, merchants and the community, thereby promoting the best use of land at certain strategic locations by prohibiting
marginal, strip business development along county roads. Minimum lot area is one (1) acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
All permitted uses are subject to the applicable provisions set forth in Article II of this Code.
Barber shop, beauty shop and similar uses.
Business, professional, or governmental office designed to attract and serve customers or clients on premises.
Contractor's office with no outdoor storage of any type.
Custom dress-making, tailoring establishment and similar uses.
Eating establishment in which there is no dancing, floorshow or other live entertainment.
Household appliance repair shop without outdoor storage, display, or business operations of any type.
Laundry, dry-cleaning, coin laundry operated by customers such as a launderette, laundromat and the like.
Medical clinic, dental clinics and other similar uses.
Personal service business.
Post office.
Retail store for food, drugs, clothing, etc. with no outdoor storage, display, or business operations of any type.
Temporary emergency construction and repair of buildings.
Veterinarian offices with no outdoor kennels. Outdoor exercise runs may be used only during normal business or
daylight hours.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
All conditional uses are subject to applicable provisions set forth in Article II[III] of this Code.
Bank with drive-in window.
Bed & breakfast inn.
Horticulture sales with outdoor display.
Radio, cellular phone or similar towers.
Sec. 4. - Protective screening.
Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to or across the street (with the exception of major arterial or major collector roads) from
residential districts shall be in compliance with applicable sections of this Code.
Sec. 5. - Restrictions.
The following restrictions shall apply to all permitted and conditional businesses in the C-1 district:
Eating and drinking establishments are allowed to have tables outside; however, there shall be no more than ten (10)
tables, or up to 25 percent of the number of indoor tables, whichever number is less.
Retail businesses shall have no more than 7,000 square feet of gross floor area.
No business operations shall be conducted between the early morning hours of [12:00] midnight and 5[:00] am with the
exception of normal business opening and closing activities, cleaning, restocking, etc. Nor shall any establishment be open to the
public during said hours.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
195/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
Unless specifically covered by this chapter, all other sections of this ordinance shall apply to all establishments.
ARTICLE XIV[XV]. - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-2)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The General Commercial district is established to provide for and encourage development of a wide variety of sales and services in
response to the broader commercial needs of the county. Minimum lot area is one (1) acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Amusement enterprises (indoor), theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, pool rooms.
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.
Automobile and manufactured home sales.
Bottling and canning plant.
Car wash.
Catalog and mail order houses.
Communication related businesses (no tower).
Construction company with heavy equipment storage.
Construction and special trade contractor sales and services provided all outdoor storage is screened from public right-of-way.
Credit institutions, depository or non-depository.
Electronic, HVAC, radio, television and appliance repair.
Fabrication and manufacturing businesses employing not more than twenty-five workers in the office and manufacturing
operations, such as a small tool and die shop, dental surgical and optical goods manufacturing.
Flea market (indoor).
Gasoline service stations.
Manufactured home dealers, automobile sales lots.
Medical and dental laboratories.
Mini-warehouses.
Mortuary, funeral home, ambulance service.
Motel, hotel.
Museum.
Nursery, greenhouse (retail).
Physical fitness facility.
Professional offices and clinics: medical, dental, photographic, real estate, insurance, personnel, advertising, surveying,
accounting, engineering, architectural, securities and investment office, travel agency, social service agency, data processing.
Public meeting hall, lodge hall.
Public utility structure.
Restaurant and other retail food establishment.
Retail store or service including the manufacture/fabrication on-site of articles sold at retail, provided such
manufacture/fabrication is incidental to the retail activity.
Travel trailer park.
Wholesaling.
All uses Permitted in the C-1 zone.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
196/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
9.1
9.2
10.
11.
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
12.
13.
14.
15.
1.
2.
3.
Boarding home.
Cemetery.
Church.
Communication related business with or without tower.
Correctional institution, jail, detention center.
Flea market (outdoor).
Hospital.
Manufactured home park.
Nightclub, lounge, club or fraternal organization not operating for profit provided:
Buildings are at least fifty feet from property lines.
A buffer strip at least ten feet deep is planted along side and rear lot lines.
Petroleum (liquefied gas) dealers.
Recreational development including, but not limited to private or public lake, swimming pool, golf course, golf driving range, or
other recreational developments subject to Zoning Commission approval of the developer's comprehensive site development
plan which must include:
Site map of not less than 1" = 400'.
The location and function of all buildings.
Proposed modifications to the natural landscape.
Location and surface treatment of all roadways.
Appropriate details of drinking water and sanitary facilities.
Timetable for build-out.
Schools located on state routes.
Signs for general advertising located at least thirty (30) feet from public right-of-way, and maintaining a minimum clearance of
eight (8) feet between grade level and bottom of sign.
Warehousing and wholesalers.
All uses Conditioned in the C-1 zone.
ARTICLE XV[XVI]. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The Industrial district is established to provide suitable area for industrial development and manufacturing. Minimum lot area is one (1)
acre.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Agricultural services.
Heavy construction contractors.
Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repair and servicing of products with the exception of the following:
Beef Fertilizer Lime
Cement Fish Paper and pulp
Chemicals Glue Plaster of Paris
Corrosive acid Gelatin Explosives
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
197/227
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21
22.
1.
1.1.
Pork Poultry Gypsum
Motor freight transportation.
Public utility structure.
Retailing.
Services.
Warehousing and storage.
Wholesaling.
Any use Permitted in the C-1 or C-2 zones.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
Airports and landing fields.
Asphalt plant.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturing.
Chemical plant.
Commercial incinerator.
Corrosive acid or alkali storage and manufacturing.
Explosives manufacturing or storage.
Fertilizer manufacturing other than blending.
Fish, poultry, beef and pork processing.
Hazardous waste facilities.
Salvage yards, automobile salvage yards or scrap metal processors.
Lumber yards, planing and sawmills.
Manufacture of glue or gelatin.
Manufacture and storage of gas including, but not limited to butane, propane, chlorine, or other toxic, noxious or pyrophoric
gases.
Paper and pulp manufacturing.
Petroleum bulk plants.
Processing of silica, clays and other soils.
Recycling centers.
Rendering plants.
Slaughter houses and stock yards.
Landfills.
Any use conditioned in the C-1 or C-2 zones.
ARTICLE XVI[XVII]. - FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT (FH)
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The Flood Hazard District is established to promote public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Require that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage
at the time of initial construction;
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
198/227
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which incre
heights, velocities, or erosion;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands; and
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channel, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
More specifically, this district is established to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets
and bridges located in floodplains;
Maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize flood blighted areas;
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
minimize prolonged business interruptions;
Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 2. - District boundaries.
The Flood Hazard District boundary shall be coterminous with the areas of Special Flood Hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Rate Map with an effective date of June 4, 1996, and any subsequent revisions thereto. The
Zoning Commission may also include those areas known to have flooded historically, or defined through standard engineering analysis by
governmental agencies or private parties but which have not been incorporated in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Sec. 3. - Permitted uses.
The Flood Hazard District is an overlay district applying to all other districts identified herein to the extent to which Special
Flood Hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Rate Map overlap with
other districts. The Flood Hazard District does not consist of permitted and conditional uses, but imposes additional standards
of development on all permitted uses and conditional uses enumerated in all other districts. In reviewing plans for
development in the Flood Hazard District the Zoning Commission shall be guided by the following standards:
Any structure or filling of land permitted shall be of a type not appreciably damaged by floodwaters;
Any structure or filling of land permitted shall be designed, constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer minimum
obstruction to, and effect upon, the flow of water;
Any structure, equipment or material permitted shall be firmly anchored to prevent it from floating away, and thus
damaging other structures and threatening to obstruct bridge openings and other restricted sections of the stream;
Where, in the opinion of the Zoning Commission, topographic data, engineering and other studies are needed to
determine the effects of flooding on a proposed structure or fill and/or the effect of the structure or fill on the flow of
water, the Zoning Commission may require the applicant to submit such data or other studies prepared by competent
engineers or other technical personnel;
The granting of approval of any structure or land use in the Flood Hazard District shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by Macon County or by any officer or employee thereof, of the practicality or
safety of any structure or use proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause action against such public body,
officer or employee for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
ARTICLE XVII[XVIII]. - CULTURAL /HISTORICAL DISTRICT (CH)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
199/227
1.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
The intent of the CH district is to protect the integrity of areas of unique value to the community. The CH district will include or provide a
buffer to sites so designated. Minimum lot area is twenty-five (25) acres.
Sec. 2. - Permitted uses.
Agriculture (row-crop), dairy farming, production of cattle, pork, poultry, aquaculture, horticulture, silviculture, to the exclusion
of high-density farming operations.
Sec. 3. - Conditional uses.
Farm stand.
Fishing pond- commercial and recreational.
Horse stable.
Hunting/ Fishing Camp.
Open air business.
Single-family residential of site-built or manufactured construction.
Rural business.
ARTICLE XVIII[XIX]. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Zone Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Front
Setback
Side
Setback
Rear
Setback
Maximum
Height
AG 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
RR 2 acres 210' 150' 50' 50' 40'
C-1 1 acre 150' 75' 15' 25' 40'
C-2 1 acre 150' 75' 15' 25' 40'
CH 25 acres 500' 150' 50' 50' 40'
FH — — — — — —
I 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
R-1 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
R-2 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
R-3 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
R-4 see
text
see
text
see
text
see
text
see
text
see
text
R-5 1 acre 150' 90' 20' 25' 40'
(1)
(2)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
200/227
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
RP see
text
100' 50' 50' 50' 20'
RVP 5 acres 300' see
text
see
text
see
text
see
text
;sz=9.5q;See minimum acreage requirement for qualification for secondary residence (Article II[III], Section 8).
;sz=9.5q;For non-compatible land uses, refer to appropriate text for setback requirements.
;sz=9.5q;Lot length shall not be more than 3 × lot width.
ARTICLE XIX[XX]. - SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 1. - Signs shall meet requirements of this section.
All signs within Macon County shall be erected, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards of this Article and
applicable sections of the Macon County Building Code, and only those signs that are permitted by these regulations shall be erected within
the County.
Sec. 2. - Signs not requiring a permit.
Signs to regulate traffic.
Signs required to be posted by law.
Warning signs and no trespassing signs.
Signs posted by governmental agencies.
Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands and similar transportation facilities.
Signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area giving information concerning the location of off-road parking facilities or
loading and unloading facilities.
Temporary real estate signs limited to a maximum of 10 square feet on a residentially zoned piece of property, and temporary
real estate signs in any district other than residential limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet.
Temporary signs on private land related to campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political and similar
organizations.
Construction signs and temporary subdivision signs limited to a maximum of 50 square feet.
Sec. 3. - No signs shall hamper trac safety.
No sign shall be erected or continued that:
Obstructs sight distance along a public right-of-way.
Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or to be
confused with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle.
Would by its nature or moving parts tend to confuse traffic or create any potential hazard to traffic.
Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals.
Sec. 4. - Illumination not to be a nuisance.
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or
illumination therefrom from being cast into neighboring structures and/or onto approaching or passing vehicles.
(1)
(2)
(3)
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
201/227
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
2.
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
2.8.
3.
3.1.
3.2.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.7.
2.
Sec. 5. - Standards for permanent signs on-site.
Standards for point-of-business signs, incidental use signs, bulletin boards and identification signs:
Maximum area of sign shall be 150 square feet.
Maximum height, 40 feet.
Signs located at ground level shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the road right-of-way line, or shall be located on
the right-of-way line with a minimum clearance under the sign of 10 feet.
Sec. 6. - Standards for o-site advertising signs (billboards).
Off-site advertising signs shall be allowed only in the following zones:
C-2 (General Commercial).
I (Industrial).
Off-site Advertising Sign Requirements:
Sign Surface Area: Minimum—72 square feet per face.
Maximum—300 square feet per face.
Maximum number of signs: Only one (1) sign per sign structure, although double-faced (back-to-back) signs on the same
support structure are permitted.
Maximum Height: Arterial Road Location - thirty-five (35) feet to bottom of sign. All other locations where allowed -
eighteen (18) feet to bottom of sign.
Minimum clearance required under sign shall be ten (10) feet.
Minimum Setback: 15 feet from the nearest road right-of-way line, and 35 feet from the intersection of any two
roadway/railroad rights-of-way.
Minimum Spacing: 750 feet between billboards on the same side of the road.
There shall be no roof-mounted billboards.
No vehicle, motorized or non-motorized, shall be driven or towed to a site for the purpose of being used as stationary
advertising.
Priority of signs.
Where the location of two or more off-site advertising signs conflict under the requirements of this ordinance, the sign
meeting the requirements of this ordinance and having the earliest dated permit for its erection shall have priority over
other signs in conflict herewith.
Off-site advertising signs shall not be established within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school, cemetery, public
park, public playground, railroad intersection or residential district.
Sec. 7. - Standards for portable signs.
Permits for portable signs shall be valid for one year and may be renewed. A permit may be granted for the erection of one (1)
portable sign on the premises of a business or institution provided the portable sign shall:
Not exceed forty (40) square feet in sign surface area;
Not utilize flashing illumination;
Not utilize colored lights (red, green, blue, yellow, etc.) which might be confused with traffic signals;
Be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the road right-of-way;
Not be allowed in any residential district;
Be placed only in a commercial or industrial zone; [and]
Not be placed or mounted on a roof.
Nonconforming portable signs shall be removed or made to conform to this ordinance within six (6) months from the effective
date of this ordinance.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
202/227
1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
2.
2.1.
2.2.
Sec. 8. - Issuance of permits, administration and ling procedure.
Application for permits to erect, hang or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the Zoning Administrator.
Each application shall be accompanied by:
Site plan showing proposed location of the sign;
Size, character and method of illumination, if any;
The exact location proposed for such sign, and in the case of a projecting sign;
Proposed method of fastening sign to the building;
Vertical distance between sign and finished grade; and
Horizontal distance between sign and road right-of-way.
Each applicant shall submit any additional information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE XX[XXI]. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 1. - Statement of purpose.
There is hereby created, simultaneous with enactment of this ordinance, the Macon County Zoning Commission and the office of the
Zoning Administrator of Macon County.
Sec. 2. - Zoning commission.
Created: Pursuant to Article IX[X], section 2, paragraph 4 of the Constitution of Georgia the Macon County Zoning Commission
(hereinafter referred to as the "zoning commission") is hereby created and established.
Membership and appointment: The zoning commission shall consist of five (5) members who meet the following
requirements: Must be a resident of Macon County for at least five (5) years; have a high school diploma or GED equivalent,
and pass a criminal background check. None of the zoning commission members shall hold any other public office. Zoning
Commission members may be removed for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Any member of the zoning
commission shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the zoning commission with respect to property in which the
member has an interest.
Quorum: Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Term of office: The terms of the members shall be for four years; except in the appointment of the first zoning commission
pursuant to this article, three of the members shall be appointed for four year terms and two members shall be appointed for
two year terms. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial
appointment.
Compensation: The zoning commission members shall receive $50.00 per meeting (monthly cap of $200) for their service and
they may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties.
Chairman: The zoning commission shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until his
successor is elected.
Administrative assistance: The county commission shall provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance as is
needed by the board to carry out its function under the provisions of these regulations.
Sec. 3. - Zoning administrator.
The individual occupying this office shall administer said ordinance in cooperation with the Macon County Zoning Commission and the
Macon County Board of Commissioners.
Appointment: The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Macon County Board of Commissioners.
Duties and authority: In administering the provisions of this ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall:
Serve as Administrative Secretary to the Zoning Commission.
Establish a system with which to maintain public records concerning the administration of this ordinance, including
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
203/227
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.
2.
3.
4.
all maps, amendments, certificates of zoning compliance, conditional uses, variances, records of public hearings,
other records relevant hereto, and see that such records and documents are maintained in current status.
Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses, for conditional uses and variances recommended by
the Zoning Commission and approved by the Macon County Board of Commissioners.
Collect data and keep informed on matters of zoning administration and practice in order to make sound
recommendations to the Zoning Commission.
Undertake other duties as may from time to time be delegated or assigned by the Macon County Board of
Commissioners.
Sec. 4. - Text or map amendments.
After due notice and public hearing the Macon County Board of Commissioners may supplement, modify, vary or change the
boundaries of the zoning districts or the requirements of this resolution by adopting amendments to the zoning map or text.
Initiation of Amendment: Amendments to the zoning map or text may be proposed by the Board of Commissioners, the
Zoning Commission, or by any owner of property within the area proposed for change.
Procedure: An application for amendment shall be filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date on which the request is to be considered by the Zoning Commission.
Review by the Zoning Commission: No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been reviewed, and a
public hearing held, by the Zoning Commission. The Zoning Commission shall have thirty (30) days following the public
hearing within which to submit a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. If the Zoning Commission fails to
submit a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Zoning
Commission shall be deemed to have approved the proposal.
Public hearing: The Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for amendment. Notice of the time
and place shall be published at least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in Macon County.
Fee: Each application for rezoning by amendment shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established
by the Macon County Board of Commissioners to partially defray administrative costs.
Minimize time between applications: A property owner shall not resubmit a proposal of zoning amendment affecting the
same property more than once in a six-month period, unless the applicant can show that the conditions upon which the
previous denial were based have substantially changed.
Sec. 5. - Zoning policies and procedures.
Policies and Procedures are herein established to provide guidelines for the following zoning activities:
Adoption of a new County Zoning Ordinance.
Adoption of an amendment which changes the text of the ordinance (Text Amendment).
Adoption of an amendment which rezones property from one zoning classification to another. (Map Amendment).
Procedural requirements for amendments sponsored by the Macon County Board of Commissioners.
Procedural requirements for amendments sponsored by a property owner or agent.
Sec. 6. - Policies and procedures for county-initiated zoning changes.
In the case of amendments to the text or map of this ordinance, the Zoning Commission and the Board of Commissioners will,
where appropriate, utilize any new or existing land use studies, land use plans or other relevant documents as a resource. The
Macon County Board of Commissioners will hold at least one public hearing on any proposed amendment to this ordinance.
Public hearing notices will be published within a newspaper of general circulation within Macon County at least one time and
at least (15) fifteen days prior to the official public hearing date. The public notice will state the time, place, and purpose of the
hearing.
Public hearings will be convened at the advertised time and place and will be presided over by the appropriate official.
The presiding officer of each respective public hearing will open the hearing by reviewing the following operating procedures.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
204/227
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10
11.
12.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
Individuals wishing to address the Zoning Commission and County Commission at their respective hearings must first be recogniz
presiding officer for the purpose of speaking. Those addressing the Commission must first identify themselves by first and last na
give their home road address, and where appropriate, business road address.
The presiding officer shall recognize one representative to speak on behalf of those supporting the question before the
Commission for a time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
The presiding officer shall recognize one representative to speak on behalf of those opposing the question before the
Commission for a time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
The presiding officer shall then grant a three (3) minute rebuttal to one spokesman supporting the question.
The presiding officer shall than grant a three (3) minute rebuttal to one spokesman opposing the question.
Appropriate notes or minutes will be recorded by the Zoning Commission and the County Commission at their respective
public hearings.
The Zoning Commission shall prepare and submit the necessary minutes, evaluations and/or recommendations to the County
Commission prior to the County Commission's Public Hearing.
The County Commission, at its public hearing, will review the evaluation and recommendations from the Zoning Commission
and may choose to adopt, reject or modify the Zoning Commission recommendations, or the business may be tabled to the
next regular County Commission meeting for additional study.
Sec. 7. - Procedures for rezoning property requests by a citizen or property owner.
An application for rezoning must be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a prescribed form, accompanied by an application
fee in the amount established by the Macon County Board of Commissioners. The application shall be filed at least thirty (30)
days prior to the meeting of the Zoning Commission at which the application is to be presented.
The Zoning Administrator will inform the applicant of the public hearing date. The Zoning Commission will convene a public
hearing on each application at the date, time and location advertised. The public notice will appear at least one time in a
newspaper of general circulation no less than 15 days nor more than 45 days prior to the public hearing.
The public hearing notice will name the applicant, the location of property to be affected, the present zoning class, the
proposed zoning class and the date, time and place of both the Zoning Commission hearing and the public hearing held by the
Macon County Board Commissioners.
The Zoning Administrator shall have erected upon the property for which rezoning is to be considered a sign of no less than
17" × 24" announcing the public hearings, stipulating the dates, times, and places for the two hearings, the present zoning
class and the proposed zoning class. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public road and shall be erected not less than 15
days before the Zoning Commission hearing date.
Public hearings held by the County Commission will follow essentially the same procedures as those of the Zoning
Commission.
Any application for rezoning of a particular parcel of property which is denied by the Board of Commissioners may not again
be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning
request.
Sec. 8. - Rezoning criteria.
Decisions of whether to approve or deny a petition to rezone property shall based on the following criteria. These criteria are
established to assist the Zoning Commission and Board of Commissioners in balancing the interests of the public with the
interests of the private property owner:
Does the proposed zoning classification promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of Macon County?
The existing uses of the subject property and adjacent and near properties.
The current zoning of the subject property and adjacent or near properties.
The extent to which property values are diminished by the present zoning restriction.
The extent to which the restrictions diminishing the property's value promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the public.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
205/227
1.6.
1.7.
1.8.
1.9.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.
1.1.
1.1.1.
1.1.2.
The relative gain to the public compared to the extent of hardship imposed upon the individual property owner (in retaining
zoning designation).
The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes.
The history of the use of the subject property considered in the context of land developments in the vicinity of the
property.
Conformity with the Macon County Future Land Use Plan.
Sec. 9. - Conditional uses.
The Zoning Commission may recommend to the Board of Commissioners approval of a petition to rezone provided the applicant agrees
to certain specified conditions related to the proposed rezoning. The Board of Commissioners will make the final decision. The procedures
and application process are the same as in Section 6 [7 of this article] - Procedures for Rezoning Request by a Citizen or Property Owner. The
sign posted on-site of the subject property shall include any conditions, requirements or limitations deemed by the Zoning Commission to be
necessary for protection of adjacent properties and the community as a whole and to carry out provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 10. - Criteria for the review of conditional uses.
An application to establish a conditional use shall be approved following a review by the Zoning Commission and a
determination by the Macon County Board of Commissioners that:
The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose(s) of this ordinance;
The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood,
nor affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers;
The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such
facility, vehicular movement, noises or fumes generation or type of physical activity; however, as noted in Article IV[V],
Sections 1 and 4, some odors, noise, etc. is inherent in agricultural activities, and this ordinance is intended to promote
the continuance of a healthy agribusiness presence in the county. To assist in determining whether or not a proposed
use is a significant nuisance, the Zoning Commission should take into consideration whether or not the applicant has
been in compliance with published Best Management Practices for the activity considered. Strict conformance to
applicable BMPs should be recognized as adequate measures in most cases to offset nuisance concerns;
The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses, and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of
sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use;
Parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted have been
met; and
Provided, the Board of Commissioners may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be
necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community and to protect the value and use of
property in the general neighborhood, provided that, wherever the County Commission shall find, in the case of any
permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any term, conditions or restrictions upon which such
permit was granted are not being complied with, said Commission shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due
notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing.
Sec. 11. - Variances.
The Zoning Commission may grant specified variances from the requirements of the ordinance. The Zoning Commission shall
have the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this ordinance where a literal enforcement of the zoning
requirements would result in undue hardship, but where exercise of such authority is not contrary to the public interest.
Procedure - Applications for variance shall be filed with the Office of the Zoning Administrator; such application must be
filed thirty (30) days before the date of the following Zoning Commission meeting in order that the required public notice
may be given before the next scheduled meeting. A simple sketch of the site, showing the following shall accompany each
application:
General location of existing structures and property lines.
Location of proposed buildings and land use.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
206/227
1.1.3.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.7.
1.8.
1.
1.1.
1.2.
1
Setbacks if applicable to the request.
Public hearing - A public hearing shall be held by the Zoning Commission for the review of an application for a variance.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in Macon County.
Fee - Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount established by the Macon
County Board of Commissioners to partially defray administrative costs.
Conditions and limitations - The Zoning Commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be
necessary to protect adjacent properties and to carry out the provisions of this resolution.
Sec. 12. - Criteria for the consideration of variance requests. .
The following criteria shall be utilized when considering request for variance from the terms of the ordinance, when approval
of such will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, yet maintain the spirit of this ordinance and preserve
and secure the public safety and welfare. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon
a finding of the Zoning Commission that:
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question and because
of its size, shape or topography; and
Strict application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an undue hardship, (e.g., locating a
newly required livestock or poultry waste treatment facility in reasonable proximity to a dairy or poultry operation; and
Such conditions are particular to the particular piece of property involved and not the making of the applicant; and
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this
ordinance, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is
prohibited by this ordinance;
The proposed use will be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the surrounding neighborhood;
The proposed use will be of a nature that vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be no more hazardous than is normal for
the district involved;
The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use will be designed to eliminate
any possible nuisance (dust, noises, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights, etc.) emanating from the use which might be
noxious to the occupants of other nearby uses; and
The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature and height of walls and fences will be such that
the proposed use will not interfere with or discourage appropriate development and the use of adjacent land and
buildings, or unreasonably affect their value.
Sec. 13. - Certicate of zoning compliance.
A certificate of zoning compliance issued by the Zoning Administrator, and certifying that the proposed structure, land use, or
alteration complies with the provisions of the zoning resolution, is required.
Site plan—Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site and
indicating such information as may be needed to present a record of existing conditions and proposed use including
proposed off-road parking and/or loading areas.
Time limit—A certificate of zoning compliance shall become invalid after the use authorized is suspended or abandoned
for the period of one (1) year.
Sec. 14. - Appeals.
An appeal by a person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer department, board or bureau may be taken to the Macon County
Board of Commissioners where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by the Zoning Administrator, Zoning Commission or other administrative official in the enforcement and interpretation of this
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
207/227
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
4.
ordinance. Such appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of the administrative action by filing with the Macon County
Clerk of Commissioners a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds thereof. If the Notice of Appeal is not filed within the thirty
(30) days, the only recourse shall be a court of record.
The County Clerk shall then transmit to the Board of Commissioners all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal
was taken. The appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the
Board of Commissioners after the Notice of Appeals has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the Notice, a stay
would, in the Zoning Administrator's opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not
be stayed, other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record.
The Board of Commissioners shall fix a reasonable amount of time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give due notice to
the parties concerned, including all landowners within three hundred (300) feet of the site in question. Such notice shall be
delivered personally or by mail, addressed to the respective owners at the address given on the last assessment roll. The
Board of Commissioners shall decide the appeal within a reasonable period of time with regard to the purposes of the
ordinance. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or through their agent.
In the event the petitioner for an appeal remains discontented with the Board of Commissioner's decision on an appeal
application, the petitioner shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the action to Macon County Superior Court.
Sec. 15. - Fees.
Fees for administration, inspection, application for rezoning, variance or conditional use applications and the issuance of
permits or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be collected by the Zoning
Administrator in advance of the issuance of such permits.
The fee for rezoning, variance or conditional use application shall be $50.00, and is hereby established by the Board of
Commissioners to cover the cost of administration, inspection and supervision resulting from the enforcement of this
ordinance.
Sec. 16. - Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the State of Georgia. Each day a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, placed, displaced,
replaced or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator, or any other
appropriate county authority, deputy sheriff or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation.
The punishment imposed for any ordinance violation shall not exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or sixty (60) days
imprisonment or both, except as otherwise provided by general law, and shall not exceed the maximum punishment specified
by this ordinance. (Pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 15-10-60.)
Prosecutions for violation of this ordinance, as with other county ordinances, shall be pursuant to article 4 of the Official Code
of Georgia Annotated and shall be heard and brought in the Magistrate Court of Macon County pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 15-
20-2(4).
Sec. 17. - Validity.
This ordinance and the various articles, sections, paragraphs and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any article,
section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the ordinance shall not be
affected thereby.
Sec. 18. - Conicting provisions repealed.
All other ordinances of Macon County and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, to the extent of such conflict and not
further, are hereby repealed.
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
208/227
Sec. 19. - Eective date.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare
of the people of Macon County, and are hereby ordered to be effective on September 1, 2002.
Approved by the Macon County Board of Commissioners in regular session this 27th day of August, 2002.
Chairman Attest:
_____
Charles W. Allen
 _____
Clerk of Commissioners
Appendix B - COUNTY FEES
Code
Section
Description Amount
Chapter 6 Alcoholic Beverages
6-25 Fingerprint report $75.00
6-30 Application fee $25.00
6-154 License fee for a package store — malt beverages and/or wine $250.00
License fee for a package store — distilled spirits (liquors) $1,500.00
License fee — private club license $250.00
6-178 License fee — wholesale dealer $150.00
Chapter 10 Buildings and Building Regulations
10-5 Fees for the re-inspections, review of plans, subsequent reviews, additional
plan review, and building permits
TBD
10-10(d) Penalty for commencing work before permit issuance 200% of permit fee,
plus required
permit fee
10-15 Permit fees for buildings, structures, and mechanical, gas, plumbing and
electrical systems
$50.00 minimum,
plus application fee
for permits
purchased in the
county
Chapter 14 Environment
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
209/227
14-93 Filing fee TBD, up to the
larger of $1,000.00
or $100.00 per acre
14-397 Application for variance fee TBD
Chapter 22 Manufactured Homes
22-4 Permit and inspection fee $100.00 to process
the application,
plus $25.00 for
each additional
follow up
inspection
Chapter 30 Roads
30-64 Address sign fee $12.00
Chapter 34 Solid Waste
34-1 Fee for each residential and commercial unit located within the
unincorporated area of the county
TBD
Chapter 38 Taxation
38-21 (a) A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee on all business and
occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening
of those accounts
TBD
(b) A regulatory fee as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those
applicable businesses
38-26 Fee per licensed practitioner Not to exceed
$400.00
Chapter 42 Towers and Antennas
42-129 Application fee TBD
Appendix A Zoning
Art. XX[XXI], 4(1.5) Rezoning application fee TBD
Art. XX[XXI], 15(2) Fee for rezoning, variance or conditional use application $50.00
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
210/227
Amount
Building Department Fees
3 Toilets @ $3.50 $10.50
2 Bathtubs @ $3.50 $7.00
3 Lavatories @ $3.50 $10.50
1 Shower $3.50
1 Kitchen Sink $3.50
1 Clothes Washer $3.50
1 Water Heater $2.50
1 Septic Tank Connection $10.00
3 Vent Stacks @ $2.50 $7.50
Thermal Expansion Device
Permit Issue Fee $10.00
Total $68.50
Temporary Service Pole $25.00
Manufactured Home Service $25.00
125 Amp Panel or Less $25.00
150 Amp Panel $35.00
200 Amp Panel $45.00
201 to 400 Amp Panel $65.00
401 to 600 Amp Panel $85.00
601 to 800 Amp Panel $105.00
801 and above Panel $125.00
Remote Disconnect $3.00
Up to 20 lights and receptacles outlets $5.00
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
211/227
21 to 30 lights and receptacles outlets $10.00
31 to 40 lights and receptacles outlets $15.00
41 or mor lights and receptacles outlets $20.00
Dryer Circuits $3.00
Range Circuits $3.00
Water Heater $3.00
GFI $5.00
Permit Issue Fee $10.00
No fee, unless inspection is required, in which case a $15.00 fee for each
inspection shall be charged
$1,000.00 or less
$15.00 for the rst $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000.00
$1,000.00 to $50,000.00
$260.00 for the rst $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00
$460.00 for the rst $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00
$1,660.00 for the rst $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof.
$500,000.00 and up
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Printed herein are the municipal fees for Macon County, Georgia. The fees were adopted by the board of commissioners
through individual legislation. For the purpose of the following table, the designation "TBD" means that the fee is to be determined by a
subsequent ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners of Macon County, Georgia.
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances, resolutions, and motions of Macon County, Georgia that were used in this Code.
Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section Section
this
Code
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
212/227
12- 6-1988(Ord.) pt. 1 6-1
2.1 6-23
2.2 6-24
2.3 6-25
2.4 6-26
2.5 6-27
2.6 6-28
2.7 6-29
2.8 6-30
2.9 6-31
3.1 6-51
3.2 6-52
3.3 6-53
3.4 6-54
3.5 6-55
3.6 6-56
3.7 6-57
4.1 6-88
4.2 6-89
4.3 6-90
4.4 6-91
4.5 6-92
4.6 6-93
4.7 6-94
4.8 6-95
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
213/227
4.9 6-96
4.10 6-97
4.11 6-98
4.12 6-99
4.13 6-100
4.14 6-101
5.1 6-131
5.2 6-132
5.3 6-133
5.4 6-134
5.5 6-135
pt. 6 6-102
7.2 6-177
7.3 6-178
7.4 6-179
7.5 6-180
7.6 6-181
pt. 8 6-2
 2-18-1999(01)(Ord.) 1.1 14-21
1.2 14-22
2.1 14-54
2.2 14-55
2.3 14-56
3.1 14-86
3.2 14-87
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
214/227
3.3 14-88
3.4 14-89
3.5 14-90
3.6 14-91
3.7 14-92
3.8 14-93
3.9 14-94
3.10 14-95
3.11 14-96
3.12 14-97
4.1 14-123
4.2 14-124
4.3 14-125
4.4 14-126
4.5 14-127
4.6 14-128
5 14-129
6.1 14-157
6.2 14-158
7, 8 14-24,
14-25
10 14-23
 2-18-1999(02)(Ord.) 1.1 14-185
1.2 14-186
1.3(1) 14-187
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
215/227
1.3(2), 1.3(3) 14-189
14-190
1.3(4) 14-221
4.1 14-222
4.2 14-223
4.3 14-224
4.4 14-225
4.5 14-226
4.6 14-227
5 14-188
7.1 14-275
7.2 14-276
8, 9 14-277
14-278
11 14-191
 2-18-1999(03)(Ord.) 1.1 14-305
1.2 14-306
2, 3 14-310
14-311
4, 5 14-341
14-342
6 14-375
7.1 14-309
8 14-343
9.1 14-394
9.2 14-395
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
216/227
9.2.1—9.2.4 14-396
14-399
10, 11 14-307
14-308
12- 5-2000(Ord.) 1.1 26-19
2.1 26-21
3.1 26-22
4.1 26-23
5.1 26-24
6.1 26-25
7.1 26-26
8.1 26-27
9.1 26-28
10.1 26-29
 3- 1-2005(Ord.) 108-31—
108-35
42-1—
42-5
108-51—
108-62
42-29
—42-
40
108-81—
108-85
42-69
—42-
73
108-101—
108-103
42-105
42-107
108-121—
108-126
42-128
42-133
2005-03  4-21-2005 30-19,
30-20
30-44,
30-45
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
217/227
30-64,
30-65
30-89
—30-
92
12-19-2005(Res.) 19-36—19-
55
38-19
—38-
38
19-57—19-
68
38-39
—38-
50
2007-01  4- 3-2007 I—IV 2-797
—2-
800
12- 4-2007(Mo.) 1.01 2-49
1.02 2-50
1.03 2-51
2.01 2-76
2.02 2-77
3.01 2-98
3.02 2-99
3.03 2-100
3.04 2-101
art. IV 2-131
5.01 2-161
5.02 2-162
5.03 2-163
5.04 2-164
5.05 2-165
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
218/227
5.06 2-166
art. VI 2-188
7.01 2-215
7.02 2-216
7.03 2-217
7.04 2-218
7.05 2-219
7.06 2-220
7.07 2-221
7.08 2-222
7.09 2-223
8.01 2-255
8.02 2-256
8.03 2-257
8.04 2-258
8.05 2-259
8.06 2-260
8.07 2-261
9.01 2-286
9.02 2-287
10.01 2-308
10.02 2-309
10.03 2-309
10.04 2-310
11.01 2-341
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
219/227
11.02 2-342
11.03 2-343
11.04 2-344
11.05 2-345
11.06 2-346
11.07 2-347
11.08 2-348
12.01 2-370
12.02 2-371
art. XIII 2-401
art. XIV 2-431
art. XV,
art. XVI
2-461,
2-462
17.01 2-463
17.02 2-464
17.03 2-465
17.04 2-466
18.01 2-486
18.02 2-487
18.03 2-488
19.01 2-515
19.02 2-516
art. XX 2-541
art. XXI—
art. XXVI
2-561
—2-
566
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
220/227
art. XXVII,
art. XXVIII
2-568,
2-569
appendix 2-587
 6-19-2008(Ord.) App. A,
Art.
III[IV],
§ 10
09-190309  3-19-2009 exh.
A(preamble)
26-47
exh. A, § 1-1
—
exh. A, § 1-3
26-48
—26-
50
06-2009-1  7- 7-2009 1—4 34-1—
34-4
 8- 4-2009(Ord.) art. 1, § A 18-1
art. 1, § B—
art. 1, § D
18-3—
18-5
art. 2, § A—
art. 2, § H
18-6—
18-13
art. 3, § A—
art. 3, § C
18-45
—18-
47
art. 4, § A—
art. 4, § G
18-68
—18-
74
art. 5 18-92
art. 6 18-2
 2-18-2010(Ord.) App. A,
Art.
II[III],
§ 10
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
221/227
10-21-2010(Ord.) 1—12 2-19—
2-30
11- 2-2010(Ord.) A—C 2-768
—2-
770
11-18-2010(Ord.) preamble 14-427
1, 2 14-428
14-429
12-16-2010(Res.) 2-309
 1- 4-2011(Res.) 2-541
 1-20-2011(01)(Ord.) A 2-734
B(1)—B(8) 2-735
—2-
742
 1-20-2011(02)(Ord.) I—VI 2-699
—2-
704
VII 2-705,
2-706
IX—XII 2-707
—2-
710
 2- 1-2011(Mo.) art. XXVII,
art. XXVIII
2-567,
2-568
2011-1  3- 1-2011 1—4 14-457
14-460
 3- 1-2011(01)(Ord.) I—XIII 2-657
—2-
669
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
222/227
 3- 1-2011(02)(Ord.) App. A,
Art.
IV[V], §
5—
App. A,
Art.
IV[V], §
7
 3- 1-2011(03)(Ord.) 1-1—1-26 10-1—
10-26
2011-2  3-17-2011 preamble 22-1
1—6 22-2—
22-7
 4-21-2011(01)(Mo.) 2-311
 4-21-2011(02)(Mo.) 2-167
 7-21-2011(Ord.) preamble 38-76
1, 2 38-77,
38-78
4 38-79
 8- 2-2011(Mo.) art. I—
art. III
2-606
—2-
608
 8-18-2011(Res.) 2-217
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within the Related Laws Part and the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to
Georgia state law.
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section 
this Code
1-1-3 1-6
1-1-7 1-5
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
223/227
1-3-1 et seq. Ch. 1
1-2
1-3-1 1-2, 1-3
1-3-2 1-2
1-3-3 1-2
14-428
1-4-1 1-2
2-10-105 38-37
3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6
3-4-49 Ch. 6
5-4-1 18-92
7-1-4 14-457
8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 10
8-2-10 et seq. App. A, Art. X[XI],
§ 25
8-2-20 et seq. 10-3
8-2-20(9) 10-1
8-2-25 Ch. 10
8-2-26 Ch. 10
10-16
10-25
8-2-110 et seq. Ch. 22
8-2-130 et seq. Ch. 22
8-2-160 et seq. 22-3
App. A, Art. X[XI],
§ 1
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
224/227
App. A, Art. X[XI],
§ 24
8-2-164 App. A, Art. X[XI],
§ 24
8-2-170 et seq. 22-1
9-11-6 1-2
12-2-8 14-305
14-341
12-5-7 14-427
12-5-280—
12-5-293
14-307
12-5-440 et seq. 14-307
12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 34
12-8-22 App. A, Art. I, § 5
12-8-39.3 34-1
12-8-62 App. A, Art. I, § 5
15-10-60 App. A,
Art. XX[XXI], § 16
15-10-60 et seq. 34-4
15-10-62, 15-10-63 30-45
15-20-2(4) App. A,
Art. XX[XXI], § 16
15-21-73 1-15
15-21-93 1-15
15-21-100 1-15
15-21-112 1-15
16-7-25 Ch. 30
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
225/227
17-10-3 1-15
31-3-5.2 14-428
32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 30
32-1-8 Ch. 30
32-4-40 et seq. Ch. 30
33-8-8 et seq. 38-37
36-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-1-3 Ch. 2
36-1-20(a) Ch. 2
18-1
36-5-20 et seq. Ch. 2
36-5-22 Ch. 2, Art. II
36-5-22.1 Ch. 2
36-9-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-17-20 et seq. Ch. 30
36-35-3 Ch. 1
36-35-6(a)(2) 1-15
36-61-11 Ch. 26
36-66-1 et seq. App. A
36-66B-1 et seq. Ch. 42
36-70-3 14-305
36-70-5 App. A, Art. I, § 4
36-80-19 1-1
36-83-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 3
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
226/227
36-91-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 2
38-2-279 2-344
2-346
41-1-1 26-19
41-2-1 et seq. Ch. 26
41-2-5 26-28
41-2-7—
41-2-17
42-2
42-38, 42-39
41-2-8 26-19
41-2-8—
41-2-17
42-4
41-2-9 26-28
41-2-12(c) 26-28
tit. 43 38-31
43-41-17(g) 10-10
45-11-1 1-14
46-5-120 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. III
38-76
46-5-134 38-79
46-5-134(f) 38-79
46-5-134.2 38-76, 38-77
46-5-134.2(a)(4) 38-77
46-5-134.2(j)(5) 38-79
46-7-15 38-37
5/30/2019 Macon County, GA Code of Ordinances
227/227
48-4-220 et seq. 26-28
48-5-355,
48-5-356
38-37
48-5-358 26-28
48-5-493 App. A, Art. X[XI],
§ 22
48-6-93 38-37
48-13-2 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II
48-13-5 38-20
48-13-5—
48-13-26
38-28
48-13-7 38-19
38-22
48-13-9 38-21
App. B
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 38-26
48-13-55 38-37
50-17-59 2-702