THE CODE OF LYONS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2002 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: December 3, 2002 
Effective: December 3, 2002 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LYONS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
John E. Moore, Sr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tracy Johnson, (Ward 1) 
Ben Mitchell, (Ward 2) 
Ivy Toole, Jr., (Ward 3) 
Carlton Robbins, (Ward 4) 
Drayton Oliver, (Ward 5) 
City Council 
____________ 
Rick Hartley 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Bruce V. Durden 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jackie Alexander 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LYONS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Willis D. NeSmith, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tracy Johnson, (Ward 1) 
Ben Mitchell, (Ward 2) 
Ivy Toole, Jr., (Ward 3) 
Wayne Hartley, (Ward 4) 
Bill Mixon, (Ward 5) 
City Council 
____________ 
Jason Hall 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bruce V. Durden 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lynn Rowland 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, as supplemented through November 9, 1999, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to The Honorable John E. Moore, Sr., Mayor, Mr. Rick Hartley, City Administrator, Mr. Bruce Durden, City Attorney and Ms. Jackie Alexander, City Clerk for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lyons, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lyons, Georgia. 2002. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2-02 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Lyons, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF LYONS, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Lyons, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 5, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or to work on the streets for a period not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 5, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the city council this 3rd day of December, 2002. 
By: 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this subpart A is the city charter, being Act No. 167 of the 2013 Ga. Laws. Act No. 167 repealed and replaced the former city charter which derived from 1907 Ga. Laws (Act No. 8), page 765; 1925 Ga. Laws (Act No. 366), page 1109; 1952 Ga. Laws (Act No. 526), page 2026, §§ 1, 3—9; 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 2352, §§ 1—3; 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 119), page 2356, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws, page 4716, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 633), page 2052, §§ 1—8, 10, 11; 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 392), page 3241, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1028), page 2722, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 408), page 2982, § 1; 1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 769), page 3037, § 1; an ordinance adopted Jan. 3, 1978, §§ 1—4; an ordinance adopted Nov. 6, 1979, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 831), page 3499, § 1; an ordinance adopted March 3, 1981, § 1; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 5296, § 1; 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 76), page 3714, §§ 1, 2; and 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1224), page 4795, § 1. Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Lyons, in Toombs County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Lyons, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the corporate limits of the City of Lyons, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of this city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of storm water and establishment of a storm-water utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Water and sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; to levy a fee, charge, or water tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of wells, storage tanks, and a water system and to levy on those to whom water services are made available a water service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the water system; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a water connection fee; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores to certain areas; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed, to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia, and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - Council creation; number, election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - Council terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The mayor and council in office on the effective date of this charter shall continue in office until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for six months and a resident of the State of Georgia for 12 months prior to the date of election of mayor or councilmembers; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. No person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember representing a council district or ward unless that person continues to reside in such district or ward during that person's period of service. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by the council or those members remaining if less than 12 months remains in the unexpired term. If such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election, as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension. This section shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
Sec. 2.13. - Mayor and council; compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in their capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by the city or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointed officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying for or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Lyons and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Tuesday in January of every year or on the first Wednesday in January if the first Tuesday is January 1. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths and shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident [of my district and] the City of Lyons for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Lyons to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or three councilmembers. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairs and officers of the council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum: voting. 
(a)  Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. If only three councilmembers are present and except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of two councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  The mayor shall cast the deciding vote in case of a tie. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be "BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lyons, Georgia..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, that an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. Any ordinance that amends the charter must be adopted at two regular consecutive meetings pursuant to Code Section 36-35-3 of the O.C.G.A. Charter amendments shall be ineffective until a copy is provided to the Secretary of State's office pursuant to Code Section 36-35-5 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but if only three councilmembers are present, the affirmative vote of at least two councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by the city clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Lyons, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(c)  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. 
Sec. 2.28. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the council. 
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Subject to Sec. 3.16 of this Charter, make personnel decisions, including, but not limited to, hiring, compensation, discipline, promotion, demotion and termination, regarding all City employees, and the City Manager may delegate such authority to any administrative officer, director, department head, manager, or supervisor who is subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision; provided that, the City Manager shall obtain the consent of the Council before hiring or terminating the head director of any department or agency or any non-elective officer, including the Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the City Clerk, the Director of Parks and Recreation, the Director of Public Works, the Municipal Court Judge, the City Attorney, the City Solicitor and the City Public Defender; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the council subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the council; 
(6)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 1a, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 2.31. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(5)  Vote in case of a tie. 
Sec. 2.33. - Submission of ordinances to mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 Noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the council at its next meeting. If the council then or at its next meeting adopts the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four members, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the council over the mayor's veto as provided by subsection (c) of this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
Sec. 2.34. - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote of all its members, the council at its organizational meeting pursuant to Section 2.18 of this charter shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
Sec. 2.35. - Mayor pro tempore; duties. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. When acting as mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall continue to have only one vote as a councilmember. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
The City shall maintain non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the City as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 1b, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed by this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three councilmembers unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the council. 
Sec. 3.14. - City accountant. 
The council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant and the audits of the city. 
Sec. 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel policies. 
The City shall maintain personnel policies regarding terms and conditions of employment with the City and to assist in the management of City employees. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 1c, 4-3-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Lyons. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge: associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council journal required in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction as provided by general laws. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before the court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, and such lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Toombs County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the council, the chief judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Division of city into wards. 
(a)  The City of Lyons, for the purpose of electing councilmembers, shall be divided into five wards consisting of the following territory within the City of Lyons: 
(1)  Ward 1: Beginning on the eastern side of Hwy No. 1 from the northern city limits to East Roosevelt Avenue; left side of East Roosevelt Avenue to North Lexington Street; south on North Lexington to East Toombs Avenue; westerly on East Toombs Avenue for one block to North Lanier Street; south on North Lanier to East Lincoln Street, east on East Lincoln Street to North Lexington Street; South on North Lexington Street to North East Broad Street (Hwy No. 152); easterly on North East Broad (Hwy No. 152) to eastern city limits on Highway No. 152. 
(2)  Ward 2: Beginning at the intersection of South Madison Street and Highway No. 152 and continues on the southern side of Highway No. 152 to the eastern city limits; south on eastern side of South Madison Street to East Gordon Avenue; east on East Gordon Avenue to South Tenth Street; south on South Tenth Street to Bonnie Drive and continues southerly on the eastern side of U.S. Highway No. 280 to southern city limits. 
(3)  Ward 3: Eastern side of U.S. Highway No. 1 from the intersection of South East Broad Street and U.S. No. 1 Hwy to southern city limits; west on South East Broad Street from U.S. No. 1 Hwy to south Madison Street; south on South Madison Street to Gordon Avenue; east on Gordon Avenue to South Tenth Street; south on south Tenth Street to Bonnie Drive; continues on Bonnie Drive to U.S. Highway No. 280; south on U.S. Hwy No. 280 to southern city limits. 
(4)  Ward 4: Beginning at the intersection of West Oglethorpe Avenue and U.S. Highway No. 280 on the western side and continuing east on West Oglethorpe Avenue to North Washington Street; South on North Washington Street for 2 blocks to North Columbia Avenue; east on West Columbia Avenue to U.S. Hwy No. 1; south on U.S. Hwy No. 1 to West Gordon Avenue; west on West Gordon Avenue for one block to South Washington Street; south on South Washington to U.S. No. 1; south on the western side of U.S. Hwy No. 1 to the southern city limits. 
(5)  Ward 5: Beginning on the western side of U.S. No. 1 Highway at the northern city limits and continues south to East Roosevelt Avenue; two blocks east on East Roosevelt to North Lexington Street; south on North Lexington Street to East Toombs Avenue; west on East Toombs Avenue to North Lanier; south on North Lanier Street to East Lincoln Avenue; west on East Lincoln to North Lexington; south on North Lexington to North East Broad Street; west on North East Broad Street to U.S. Highway No. 1; north on U.S. No. 1 to East Columbia; west on East Columbia Avenue to North Washington Street; north on North Washington Street to West Oglethorpe Avenue; west on West Oglethorpe Avenue to Ga. Highway No. 292; west on Ga. Hwy No. 292 to the western city limits. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Whenever the description of any ward refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Any part of the City of Lyons which is not included in Ward 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, as described in this section, or any territory annexed into the City of Lyons shall be included within Ward 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, wherever such ward is contiguous to such part or territory and contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 5.12. - Selection of councilmembers by ward. 
One councilmember shall be elected from each of the five wards described in Section 5.11 of this charter. The councilmember from each respective ward shall be elected by the voters of that particular ward in which they reside as described in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.13. - Mayor. 
The mayor shall be elected by the voters of the entire city. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without any party designation. 
Sec. 5.16. - Election by majority vote. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
Sec. 5.17. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
Sec. 5.18. - Time of election of councilmembers, mayor. 
(a)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2013, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, the councilmembers from Wards 1, 2, and 4 shall be elected to serve four-year terms of office. 
(b)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2015, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, the mayor and the councilmembers from Wards 3 and 5 shall be elected to serve four-year terms of office. 
(c)  Terms of office for mayor and councilmembers shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office as provided in Section 2.18 of this charter on the first Tuesday in January following the election. 
Sec. 5.19. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished in one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this paragraph shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Toombs County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Toombs County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Lyons. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided that the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the city at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 120 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget, the capital budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by council on budget. 
(a)  The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than October 1 of each year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, special, or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the council but no later than 120 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. 
(b)  The council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than October 1 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney and as a matter of course is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the council and such approval is entered in the council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners if such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of such street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase such property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.15. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Lyons, Georgia, in the County of Toombs, approved August 7, 1907 (Ga. L. 1907, p. 765), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 2013. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of local acts that amend the Charter. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the ordinance amendments to the Charter. 

 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this subpart B are local constitutional amendments applicable to the City of Lyons. The source of each amendment is stated in a history note following the provision. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Lyons Development Authority. 
A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in the City of Lyons in Toombs County to be known as the Lyons Development Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of the City of Lyons and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the "Authority"; 
B.  The authority shall consist of five members who shall serve for a term of five years and who shall be eligible for reappointment. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lyons. The first members shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed for terms of five years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. No member shall be mayor nor a member of the council of the City of Lyons, but there shall be no other disqualification to hold public office by reason of membership in the authority; 
C.  The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of the City of Lyons; 
The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants nor lessees of the authority. The right of any private person to use or occupy any real estate of the authority for a period of one year or longer under any lease or other agreement for the purposes of taxation shall be classed as an interest in the real estate and as real property and shall be taxed as real property as now provided by law, or may be taxed as the General Assembly may hereafter provide by general or local law. The tax exemption herein provided also shall not include exemption from sale and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use of the authority. 
D.  The powers of the authority shall include but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  To buy, acquire, develop, improve, own[,] operate, maintain, sell[,] lease as lessor and lessee, and mortgage land, buildings and property of all kinds within the City of Lyons and also without the City of Lyons, but not beyond the limits of Toombs County; 
(2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
(3)  To grant, loan and lease without adequate consideration or without any consideration and with and without security, any of its funds and property to private persons and corporations operating or proposing to operate any industrial plant or establishment within the City of Lyons or at any place within Toombs County sufficiently close to the City of Lyons to be of benefit to the people of the city in the judgment of the authority. The provisions of this clause shall not be construed to limit any other power of the authority; 
(4)  To borrow money and to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(5)  To contract with the City of Lyons, other municipalities and other political subdivisions and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(6)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporations except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(7)  To encourage and promote the expansion of industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation in the City of Lyons and in Toombs County, and to make long-range plans therefor; 
(8)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lyons; 
(9)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(10)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(11)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
E.  The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation, against the City of Lyons, the State of Georgia, nor Toombs County; 
F.  The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the authority when in performance of the work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia when in performance of their public duties or work of the State. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority; 
G.  The members of the authority shall receive only such compensation for their services to the authority as shall be authorized by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lyons but such compensation shall be paid from the funds of the authority; 
H.  The City of Lyons is authorized to levy an annual tax, not to exceed one mill, in addition to all other taxes of whatever kind, on all taxable property within the city for the support of the authority and for its use and purposes, and all funds raised by such tax shall be paid and appropriated by the City of Lyons to the authority and when paid to the authority, shall become a part of its funds and may be used by it for any of its purposes and powers as herein provided or as may be hereafter provided by law, which tax shall be in addition to all other taxes authorized by law; 
I.  The City of Lyons is also authorized in addition to the tax provided in Paragraph H, to appropriate to the authority such amount from its funds each year as its governing authority and [sic] shall see fit but not exceeding ten percent of its total receipts from business licenses for the year, and any funds so appropriated when paid to the authority shall become a part of its funds and may be used by the authority in accordance with its powers and purposes as herein stated or as may be hereafter defined by law; 
J.  The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, funds or income may be sold under the legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation; 
K.  This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare of the City of Lyons and its citizens, industry, agriculture, trade, commerce and recreation within the City of Lyons and in Toombs County, and making of long-range plans for such development and expansion and to authorize the use of public funds of the City of Lyons for such purposes, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose; 
L.  This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the Governor and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within thirty days after such proclamation; 
M.  The General Assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the City of Lyons with power to extend its operations outside of the City of Lyons but not beyond the limits of Toombs County as herein provided, and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within Toombs County and the City of Lyons. The General Assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond the limits of the City of Lyons and Toombs County; 
N.  There shall be no limitation upon the amount of debt which the authority may incur, but no debt created by the authority shall be a debt of the City of Lyons, the State of Georgia, nor Toombs County. 
(1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 29), page 181, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § V, ¶ I, was continued by 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 327), page 4501. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table gives the location of Georgia Laws in the Related Laws. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation of and citation to Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Lyons, Georgia," or "Lyons City Code" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any section of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any section of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other sections of this Code, the section imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Lyons, Georgia, as amended. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Lyons, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council, city council. The terms "council" and "city council" mean the city council of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
County. The term "county" means Toombs County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
State Law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. A reference to an official, employee, board, commission or other agency by title only, refers to the official, employee, board, commission or other agency of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership, body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
(Code 1977, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the sections of this Code may be made by amending those sections by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"Section _____ of The Code of Lyons, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Lyons, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or to work on the streets for a period not exceeding 60 days or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1977, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Maximum penalties authorized in municipal court, § 15. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-8. - Appearance or bail bonds. 
The amounts of appearance or bail bonds for offenses against the city shall be as prescribed by the municipal judge. 
(Code 1977, § 1-9) 
Charter reference— Bonds to be approved by municipal judge, § 16. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-10. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The sections appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of the Code of the city, as amended, and ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Amending the city Charter. 
(2)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(3)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(13)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)  Pertain to zoning, including but not limited to the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map. 
(15)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-12(5); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-12(7); any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(8); administration and enforcement of animal regulations, § 10-36 et seq.; animal control superintendent, § 10-37; fire marshal, § 30-1; administration of wellhead protection, § 34-33; personnel, ch. 46; administration of personnel policies, § 46-72; planning, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 68; utilities, ch. 74; administration, enforcement and penalties of zoning regulations, app. A, § 120 et seq.; zoning enforcement officer, app. A, § 121. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City buildings deemed smoke free. 
All city buildings will be deemed smoke free. 
(Code 1977, § 2-4) 
State Law reference— Smoking in public places, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-2. 
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-31. - Time and days of meetings. 
The city council shall meet every first Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1) 
Charter reference— Authority to fix time of meetings, § 12. 
Sec. 2-32. - Copies of minutes. 
A copy of the minutes of the meetings of the city council shall be mailed or delivered by the city clerk to each councilmember in sufficient time for such councilmember to receive the minutes prior to the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-33. - Compensation. 
The mayor shall receive a salary of $500.00 per month. Councilmembers shall receive a salary of $150.00 per month. 
State Law reference— Authority to determine salary of governing body, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-34—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 50-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-126. - Created. 
There is hereby created a new development authority known as the city development authority, including two appointed members allowing the authority to negotiate with nursing homes. 
(Code 1977, § 17-6) 
Related Laws reference— Additional development authority, § 1. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-127—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-12(4). 
State Law reference— Local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-181. - Designation of city depository; liability of officers and employees for funds. 
(a)  Such bank as is determined by the city council shall be designated as depository for such funds as may come into the hands of the city officers and employees, which funds shall be deposited in such bank. 
(b)  City officers and employees shall be held liable for all funds that may come into their hands while acting in their official capacities, until such funds are so deposited and receipts taken therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1) 
Sec. 2-182. - Writing and signing checks. 
The city clerk shall have authority to write and sign all checks, which must also be signed by the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 9-5) 
Sec. 2-183. - Approval of checks and accounts. 
All checks drawn and accounts paid by the city clerk that are of a legal and binding obligation of the city shall be approved. 
(Code 1977, § 9-6) 
Sec. 2-184. - Service charge on returned checks. 
The city will charge the maximum amount authorized by law as a service charge for handling each returned check. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8) 
State Law reference— Service charge limitations, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-20(j). 
Secs. 2-185—2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-211. - Bill approval and payment procedure. 
(a)  All purchases of every nature or kind for and on behalf of the city shall be made by a member of the city council or other officer or employee designated as purchasing agent. 
(b)  No bills, charges or debits shall be submitted to the city council for approval unless the bills, charges or debits bear the written approval of the purchasing agent. 
(c)  All bills against the city shall be submitted to the city council at its regular meeting and shall not be paid until so approved by the city council at its regular meeting. Only those bills contracted, authorized and approved by the purchasing agent shall be submitted to the city council for its approval. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2) 
Sec. 2-212. - Purchase order required for merchandise. 
A bill to the city will not be honored unless, when the merchandise was purchased, it was accompanied by a purchase order, signed by authorized personnel. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3) 
Sec. 2-213. - Purchases without council approval. 
The limits of purchases without council approval shall be $1,000.00 for the mayor and $100.00 for the city administrator. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4) 
Chapters 3—5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 7, 2015, amended ch. 6 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former ch. 6, §§ 6-1, 6-2, 6-31—6-34, 6-61, 6-62, 6-91—6-96, 6-126—6-132, 6-161—6-167, 6-196—6-199, and 6-226—2-230, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 3-1—3-10, 3-21—3-28, 3-35—3-41, 3-42—3-48, 3-55—3-58, 3-58.1, 3-59, 3-59.1, 3-60, and 3-60.1—3-60.3 of the 1997 Code and Ord. No. 2007-01, adopted Nov. 6, 2007. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; drinking in public, § 38-1; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 42-28. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose of chapter and applicability of article. 
This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the city to promote the health and general welfare of its citizens; to regulate and control the licensing and sale by the package and by the drink of beer, malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits; to establish reasonable regulations and ascertainable standards for licensees which will ensure the public peace; to protect schools, churches, residential areas from the negative secondary effects attributable to establishments that sell beer, malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits; and to ensure that only qualified persons obtain licenses for the manufacture, sale or distribution of beer, malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. Further, unless otherwise provided, sections 6-2 through 6-27 of this article shall apply to all types of alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, music hall, theater, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patron's own alcoholic beverages. 
Code means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
City means the City of Lyons, Georgia, and the land within the corporate limits of Lyons, Georgia within Toombs County, Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Hotel means any lodge, inn, or similar establishment which offers overnight sleeping accommodations to registered guests for hire, and at which prepared meals or food are regularly served daily and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. Hotels may grant franchises for the operation of a restaurant and lounge on their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in this definition of a hotel. Lounges may be located separately from dining facilities in hotels provided there is a commonality of ownership of the restaurant and lounge. 
License means the authorization granted by the governing authority of the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in a specified manner for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license is issued or, in the case of any type of partnership, limited liability company or corporation, all partners, officers, managers and directors of the partnership, limited liability company or corporation, and the use of a masculine, feminine or neutral pronoun to describe licensee will contemplate the correct licensee even if the incorrect pronoun is used. 
Liter means metric measurement, currently used by the United States. 
Manager means the person who supervises the regular operations of businesses licensed under this chapter. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The word "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits. 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Minor means any person under the age of 21 years. 
Owner means any person or partner or stockholder or member owning any percentage of a business. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license including any public sidewalk or roadway adjacent to the premises which is used by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Public club means an establishment, other than a restaurant as defined in this chapter, having the principal purpose of offering live music, dancing, theatrical productions or comedians, and at which the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises only is an attendant purpose. A public club shall not be operated or conducted in conjunction with any other type of business, trade or profession and may offer and sale only those items commonly associated with such establishments. 
Public place means any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Purchaser means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust or association purchasing alcoholic beverages from a licensee. 
Restaurant means any public place used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen, where the principal business is the sale of food, and that: (i) fills 75 percent of the usable square footage of its primary premises, including decks and patios which are immediately adjacent to and a part of its primary premises, with tables and chairs intended for dining, (ii) is staffed at all times while open to the public with a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve edible food to its guests, iii) is open to the public at least four hours a day, serving at least one meal per day, (iv) serves meals at least five days a week with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations and periods of maintenance, construction or remodeling, (v) does not have a common table or counter area that comprises more than 25 percent of its dining area, and (vi) derives at least 51 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals and food, and in calculating annual gross sales, it shall use all of its receipts, including those of persons laboring on the premises, such as all employees independent contractors, performers, servers and entertainers. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only, to consumers and not for resale. 
School means any school building, school grounds, college campus, educational facility or educational building owned or run by or affiliated with a state, county, city or private or religious entity, any church school, day care, or kindergarten and to any building at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. It shall not apply to home schools. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person intentionally to violate any prohibition in this chapter. Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this chapter shall, after trial and conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Violation of any provision of this chapter may also, in addition to any criminal punishment, be cause for the denial, probation, suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-4. - License application and fees. 
(a)  Any person seeking any license permitted by this chapter shall file a written application with the city clerk, on the forms prescribed by the city clerk. Each application shall state: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, birth date, present address and addresses for the past five years, business address and business addresses of employers and their addresses for the last five years, name of spouse, complete record of all arrests, convictions and guilty pleas ("guilty plea", whenever used in this chapter, shall include any plea entered under any local, state or federal ordinance or law relating to nolo contendere, first offender or conditional discharge, regardless of the nomenclature used by the local, state or federal government) for violations of any city or local ordinance and of any state or federal law and the disposition of all arrests and charges within the last five years prior to the application. As well, the applicant shall present to the city clerk originals of the following documents for copying (such copies shall be kept by the city clerk): (i) current state driver's license, (ii) birth or naturalization certificate, and (iii) two forms of valid picture identification, including but not limited to current state driver's license, current passport, current state identification card or military identification card; 
(2)  Exact location of the applicant's proposed premises, including street address, zoning district and tax map and parcel number; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner or landlord and/or resident manager of the applicant's proposed premises, whether or not there is a building already erected thereon; 
(4)  Trade name (or proposed trade name) of the applicant's proposed business and/or premises; and 
(5)  Names and addresses of all persons having any financial or beneficial interest in the applicant's proposed business or premises. 
(b)  As to the manager of the applicant's proposed premises (if not the same as the applicant), the same information as required of the applicant in this section. 
(c)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified bank check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified bank check in the amount of $200.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being submitted to the city council, or if the application is denied by the city council, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the $200.00 paid for investigation and administrative costs shall not be refunded. 
(d)  The application shall be sworn to or affirmed under oath. 
(e)  Surveyor's certificate. All new applications shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor containing the following information about the applicant's premises or proposed premises: 
(1)  A scale drawing of the premises or proposed premises, as situated on the proposed lot or land; 
(2)  Any proposed off-street parking facilities available to the premises or proposed premises and all outdoor lighting for the premises or proposed premises; 
(3)  The exact location of the premises or proposed premises, including street address and Toombs County tax map parcel number; 
(4)  Current zoning classification of the premises or proposed premises; and 
(5)  The distance in yards as measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises or proposed premises to nearest property line of each of the following: the nearest school ground or college campus, the nearest church building and the nearest alcoholic treatment center which is owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government. 
(f)  If the applicant's business has been licensed since July 1, 1981, or before, the survey shall be required however no license will be denied based upon a failure to meet the distance requirements as set forth under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(g)  False information. An application under this chapter containing known false information may result in the denial of the license applied for and prosecution as a felony. 
(h)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such initial license only, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(i)  Applications must be filed on or before November 30 of each year; otherwise, a penalty equal to 20 percent of the annual license fee shall be imposed. 
(j)  Except for temporary licenses that may be granted pursuant to this chapter, all licenses shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall not be prorated for any reason, and license fees shall not be refundable for any reason. 
(k)  Failure to furnish complete information in the application will delay the issuance of the license. The failure to furnish complete information within 30 days after being requested to do so by the city clerk may be cause to deny the application. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-5. - Moral character of license applicants. 
No person shall be issued any license unless it appears to the satisfaction of the city council that the license applicant is of good moral character. At the time an application is filed, the applicant shall, by affidavit duly sworn or affirmed, certify that he has not been convicted of or entered a guilty plea to any misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude, any lottery or gambling offense, or any offense related to illegal possession, distribution or sale of any illegal drug or substance (including but not limited to marijuana or any narcotic) or liquor within five years of the filing of the application. No license shall be granted where any applicant has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law or entered a guilty plea to any misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude, any lottery or gambling offense, or any offense related to illegal possession, distribution or sale of any illegal drug or substance (including but not limited to marijuana or any narcotic) or liquor within five years of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-6. - General licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No applicant for a license shall be issued to any person who is not a citizen of the United States. In particular, no license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only or for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be granted to any person who is has not been a resident of Toombs County, Georgia, for one year before the filing of the application, unless the applicant designates a Toombs County resident (such resident shall be an individual) who consents in writing to be responsible for any matter related to the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or possess for the purpose of sale, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage within the city, except pursuant to a license as permitted by this chapter. 
(c)  An applicant shall possess a valid state alcohol or alcoholic beverage license before applying for a license as permitted by this chapter. 
(d)  A retail premises or business shall not have alcoholic beverages on its sales floor or in its cooler unless such premises or business has a license as permitted by this chapter. 
(e)  Any license issued under this chapter shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state law. 
(f)  Where the applicant is any type entity, including but not limited to a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, members, managers. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its president or chief executive officer. In the case of limited liability company, the license shall be issued jointly to the company and to the holder of the largest economic interest in the company. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued jointly to the partners. 
(g)  No license shall be issued to any person that has not attained the age of 21 years. 
(h)  No license shall be issued to any person who has had any license issued by the city revoked within the two years prior to the filing of an application as permitted by this chapter. 
(i)  The city council may decline to issue a license to any person that has violated any part of this chapter within one year prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(j)  The city council may decline to issue a license where any person having any interest in or control over the licensee or licensed business or premises does not meet the same moral character requirements applicable to licensee, as set forth in this chapter. 
(k)  The city council may decline to issue a license when after reasonable effort the city clerk or chief of police is unable to verify any statement or information required to be disclosed in the application. 
(l)  Any person who is issued a license shall have and continuously maintain in Toombs County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served upon. This registered agent shall be a resident of Toombs County. The licensee shall file the name of the registered agent, along with the written consent of such agent to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter, with the city in such form as prescribed by the city clerk. 
(m)  No license shall be issued to any person until he provides the city clerk with proof of current commercial general liability insurance, covering the business and/or premises seeking the license, in the form of a true and correct insurance declarations page. Such proof must be provided annually to the city clerk. 
(n)  No license shall be issued to any person for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only or for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package unless such person personally appears before the city council at one regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-7. - Each location to have a separate license; transferability of license; fee required to change business owner, manager, partner, shareholder or business name. 
(a)  An applicant who will operate more than one premises shall complete a separate application for each premises and shall pay all applicable license fees for each premises. Each application shall be accompanied by a survey from a registered land surveyor showing that the premises is not within the prohibited distance from any school, school ground, church building or alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government. 
(b)  Each license shall be personal to the licensee. No license shall be transferable, except as provided in this section. 
(c)  In the case of the death of a licensee, the deceased licensee's license shall be the property of his, her, or its heirs or personal representatives, as the case may be, and the business or premises may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death of deceased licensee or until expiration of deceased licensee's license or until issuance of a new licensee, whichever occurs first, and upon such occurrence authorization to sell under the deceased licensee's license shall terminate by operation of law. 
(d)  If 50 percent or more of a licensed entity is to be sold or transferred to a person other than any existing partner, shareholder or member, then such licensed entity shall apply for a new license as set forth herein and pay all license costs and fees, if such licensed entity desires to be authorized, or continue to be authorized, to sell alcoholic beverages as permitted in this chapter. 
(e)  Any licensee who desires to change the location of his premises within the city shall so notify the city clerk in writing three business days prior to any such change of location. The notice of change of location shall be accompanied by a survey as required by subsection (a) of this section. A licensee's business shall not change location unless the new location complies with all provisions of this chapter. The city council shall have the authority to approve or deny the change of location in the same manner that it may approve or deny the issuance of a new license. An investigative fee of $200.00 shall be paid by the licensee at the time that a notice of change of location is made. If a change of location is approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Any licensee who desires to change the name of his business or premises shall so notify the city clerk in writing at least three business days prior to any change of name, and the city clerk shall direct the issuance of a corrected license in replacement of the original license. A fee of $25.00 shall be paid by the licensee at the time that such notice given for the change of name of such business or premises. 
(g)  Any licensee who changes the manager of his business or premises shall so notify the city clerk in writing at least three days of the effective date of notice of the change of manager and shall file with the city clerk such information about the new manager as the city clerk may require. A fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time that the notice for the change of manager is made to defer the costs of investigation and administration. 
(h)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership or control of any licensed entity shall be cause to revoke any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-8. - Issuance of licenses subject to state law and code requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any elected official of the city or any employee of the city, nor shall any such person have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license. 
(b)  No license shall be issued in connection with any premises that fail to meet all applicable state and local fire, life safety, building, health, and zoning regulations of the Code. 
(c)  No license shall be issued in connection with any premises in any city zoning district, except for commercial zoning districts within the city known as C-1 and C-2. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes, business license fees, occupational taxes, or any other tax or fee which is owed to the city by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-9. - License may issue; sales prohibited in incomplete premises. 
Where a person applies for a license in connection with a premises that is not yet in existence or completed, a license may be issued for such premises, provided that the plans for such premises comply with this chapter and the Code. No sales shall be allowed in such premises until it has been completed in accordance with such plans, a certificate of occupancy issued, and it has been inspected by the proper officials, including but not limited to the city code enforcement officer, to ensure compliance with this chapter and the Code. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-10. - Expiration of license for failure to commence or operate business. 
(a)  All licensed premises must open for business within six months after issuance of the license. Failure to do so shall serve as a basis for revocation of such license by the city council, unless an extension of time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period, for good cause shown by the licensee. No refund of the license fee shall be made in the event of a revocation hereunder. 
(b)  Any licensee who begins operating the business or premises authorized in the license, but who thereafter ceases operation for six months within any calendar year, shall be subject to revocation of his license by the city council, unless an extension of time is granted by the city manager before the expiration of the six-month period, for good cause shown by the licensee. No refund of license fee shall be made in the event of a revocation hereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-11. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew the license shall file an application, with the requisite fees as set forth in this chapter, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. All applications for renewal will be reviewed by the city clerk. A licensee does not have a right to automatic renewal and must be compliant with this chapter when applying for the renewal of his license. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before November 30 of each year; otherwise, a penalty equal to 20 percent of the annual license fee shall be imposed. No renewal license shall be granted after December 31, but such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been issued to licensee. 
(b)  Except for temporary licenses that may be granted pursuant to this chapter, all licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall not be prorated for any reason, and license fees shall not be refundable for any reason. 
(c)  Failure to furnish complete information in the renewal application will delay the issuance of the license. The failure to furnish complete information within 30 days after being requested to do so by the city clerk may be cause to deny the renewal application. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-12. - Denial, probation, suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, no license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subjected to denial, probation, suspension or revocation, except for any ground, cause, good cause or due cause as hereinafter defined. 
(b)  The terms "ground", "cause", "good cause" or "due cause" (hereafter these terms may be collectively referred to as "ground") for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Conviction of or guilty plea to any misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude, any lottery or gambling offense, or any offense related to illegal possession, distribution or sale of any illegal drug or substance (including but not limited to marijuana or any narcotic) or liquor, by the licensee or any of licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in the license; 
(2)  Knowing falsification of any fact given in an application for a license or bearing upon the licensee's qualification for a license; 
(3)  Failure or refusal to meet or maintain any requirement or standard prescribed by this chapter as a condition to or qualification for the issuance of a license; 
(4)  Violation of the specified days or hours of operation or sales as set out in this chapter; 
(5)  Selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages during a period of suspension; 
(6)  Where the licensee's business or premises does not meet the licensing requirements as set forth in this chapter; 
(7)  Littering, loitering or public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the licensed business or premises; and 
(8)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city council whereby it is objectively shown that the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding any interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or premises, or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises, that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics. With respect to this section, it may be inferred that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such inference may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence, could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(c)  The city council shall provide a written statement of charges of any ground, cause, good cause or due cause, to applicant or licensee, as the case may be, and the city council shall provide the statement of charges by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee or applicant and his attorney, if he is represented by an attorney, with a copy to the city attorney. Thereafter, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request, within ten days of the date of the licensee's or applicant's receipt of the statement of charges, a hearing on the statement of charges, and he shall do so by filing a written hearing request with the city clerk. Upon receipt by the city clerk of the hearing request, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days, and the applicant or licensee shall be notified in writing, no less than five days before such hearing, of the date, time, and place of said hearing (the city's notice of hearing shall be served by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee or applicant and his attorney, if he is represented by an attorney). The hearing shall be before the city council, and at the hearing the applicant or licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney and to have witnesses appear on his behalf and to cross examine opposing witnesses and present evidence. The witnesses shall testify under oath, but technical rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(d)  In the event that the city council determines that there exists any ground for the suspension of a license, a period of license suspension may be imposed by the city council for a term not to exceed 90 days. In addition to such suspension, the city council is authorized to impose such special conditions as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the city council. Such special conditions shall be designed to address or remedy the situation or circumstances that caused the imposition of the suspension. The city council must receive written certification of compliance with the special conditions by the chief of police in order to conclude suspension period, and in the event that the licensee fails to comply with the special conditions, then the license shall remain suspended until the chief of police provides the certification of compliance to the city council. 
(e)  In the event that the city council determines that there exists any ground for the revocation of a license, the revocation of a license by the city council shall be for the remaining calendar year of the year in which the revocation is imposed. In addition to such revocation, the city council is authorized to impose such special conditions as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the city council with respect to the licensee reacquiring license. Such special conditions shall be designed to address or remedy the situation or circumstances that caused the imposition of the revocation. The city council must receive written certification of compliance with the special conditions by the chief of police in order to conclude the revocation period, and in the event that the licensee fails to comply with the special conditions, then the license shall remain revoked after the chief of police provides the certification of compliance to the city council. 
(f)  In the event that the city council determines that there exists any ground for the placing any license on probation, such probation shall be for a period not to exceed 90 days. In imposing such probation, the city council is authorized to impose special conditions upon the license holder that are designed to address or remedy the situation or circumstances that caused the imposition of the probation. In no event shall the license holder be prohibited from exercising the privileges of a license holder during the term of probation, except to the extent that such special conditions may impose conditions upon the exercise of such privileges during the term of the probation. 
(g)  The city council's decision regarding denial of an application, or probation, suspension or revocation of a license, shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant or licensee and his attorney, if he is represented by an attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court of Toombs County, Georgia. 
(h)  Upon the licensee's or applicant's receipt of any statement of charges by the city council, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and consent to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any consent entered under this chapter shall be in the form of a written decree, executed by the licensee and the city and non-appealable. 
(i)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, upon the revocation of a licensee's state alcohol or alcoholic beverage license, the licensee's license issued under this chapter shall be immediately revoked by operation of law. The chief of police, upon notice of this revocation, shall take the necessary steps to ensure the immediate cessation of such licensee's sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-13. - Inspection of licensed business or premises by the police department. 
Sworn police officers of the city shall have the authority to inspect any business or premises licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the business or premises is open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-14. - License and certain code provisions to be posted. 
(a)  All licenses shall include a statement as to the type of license issued, the name of the licensee, the name of the licensed business or premises, and the address of the licensed business or premises. All licenses shall, at all times, be kept in plain view within the licensed business or premises. 
(b)  All licensees shall post in a prominent location on the licensed business or premises, in plain view of all individuals on the premises, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the city and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(c)  Each sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the chief of police and include either the language of the applicable Code sections, or summaries approved by the chief of police. 
(d)  The city clerk is authorized to design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price, not to exceed $75.00, to be established by the city clerk and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(e)  All licenses shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the ordinances of the city and state law. 
(f)  All licenses shall have printed on the front these words: "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING SUSPENDED OR REVOKED AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-15. - Application of chapter provisions to minors generally. 
(a)  No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in or about the premises of any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to attempt to purchase an alcoholic beverage or for any person to purchase an alcoholic beverage for a person under 21 years of age. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to exhibit faked, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain an alcoholic beverage to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age, other than an employee employed by a licensed person, to have an open container of any alcoholic beverage in his possession. 
(e)  It shall be a violation for any licensee not to require and properly check identification to ensure that a person under 21 years of age is not sold, served, or has in his possession any alcoholic beverage while in a licensed business or premises, except that a licensed employee working in a licensed business or premises may have in his possession any alcoholic beverage for the purpose of selling or serving such alcoholic beverages. The term "identification" as used in this section, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, a photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-16. - Acts prohibited by licensee generally. 
No licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed business or premises: 
(1)  Sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  Sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(3)  Sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage on any day or at any time when such sale is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of a person not licensed for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverage by drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-17. - Purchases from and sales to person other than licensees 
No licensed retail dealer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a licensed wholesale dealer. No licensed wholesale dealer shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any person other than a licensed retail dealer. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-18. - Unlawful conduct on licensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his agent or employee to permit any disturbance of the peace, any obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper behavior, conduct or practices in the licensed business or premises, or to operate the licensed business or premises in such a manner as to create a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee to fail to report to the police department any disturbance which occurs immediately outside his business or premises, or in the parking facilities of his business or premises, of which he has knowledge. 
(c)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee, his agent, or employee to report to the police department any usage or possession of illegal drugs or narcotics and to report any unlawful conduct of any nature which occurs on the licensed premises, of which he has knowledge. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee, to fail to assist any law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's duties while the officer is in or on a licensed business or premises. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-19. - Open area and patio sales. 
Consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages in open areas or on decks or patios is not permitted unless a licensee's business or premises is licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only, and such licensee complies with the following regulations: 
(1)  The open area, patio or deck must be enclosed in a manner that directs ingress and egress by the public through a single entrance only through the licensed business or premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the open area, patio or deck with an alcoholic beverage without the licensee's knowledge. 
(2)  The open area, patio or deck shall be enclosed by a structure at least 42 inches in height as measured from the floor of the open area, patio or deck. Such structure must meet all building code requirements of the city. 
(3)  Any licensee desiring to obtain approval for open area, patio or deck sales must submit to the city a complete set of plans that will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by appropriate city employee(s). All plans and final construction pursuant to such plans shall meet the requirements of this chapter, all applicable health, life safety and fire codes, any other code applicable to such structures. Only upon satisfactory completion of all final inspections will the city approve of any open area, patio or deck sales. 
(4)  Any structure or area set aside for open area, patio or deck sales shall not contain a number of square feet that represents an amount greater than 40 percent of the existing seating area of the licensed business or premises. 
(5)  Loudspeakers or other amplifiers of sound shall not be permitted upon the open areas, patios or decks of any licensed business or premises. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-20. - Open containers and brown bag establishments prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages or other intoxicating beverage at any public place within the city, or for any person to have in his possession any unsealed or opened container with such intoxicating beverage in it at any public place within the city, except as may be otherwise temporarily permitted by this chapter or the Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or possess any alcoholic beverage upon real property of the city that is used as a public park, playground or school. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverages in any automobile on the streets of the city, whether such automobile shall be moving or parked. 
(d)  Brown bag establishments shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Local location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3). 
Sec. 6-21. - Signs and advertising. 
(a)  No outdoor advertising promoting the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the exterior of any business or premises that is licensed for wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic beverages or any business or premises that is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only. 
(b)  Any indoor sign or display promoting the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be visible from the exterior of any business or premises that is licensed for wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic beverages or any business or premises that is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only, subject to the limitations of section 6-25. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-22. - Happy hour promotions. 
No licensee, or his agent or employee, shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: (a) advertising "Happy Hour" through any form of media, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, electronics, radio, television and internet, or (b) outdoor advertising or signs promoting "Happy Hour" on the exterior of any licensed premises or on the windows or elsewhere on the licensed business or premises that may be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-23. - Measurement of distances. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements, to determine distances as required by this chapter relating to the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure in which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door of the building (in the case of churches or alcoholic treatment centers which are owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government), or to the nearest portion of the grounds (in the case of schools), whichever is more appropriate under the applicable section. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Local location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3). 
Sec. 6-24. - Hours of operation for licensees. 
(a)  A licensed retail dealer of alcoholic beverages by the package shall not sell, give away or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage during the following time periods: 
(1)  Monday: from 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Tuesday through Saturday: from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.; and 
(3)  Sunday: from 12:01 a.m. until 12:30 p.m. and from 11:30 p.m. through 12:00 midnight; provided that, the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday under this subsection shall also be subject to and governed by section 6-28(a). 
(b)  A licensed retail dealer of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only shall not sell, give away or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage during the following time periods: 
(1)  Monday: from 12:01 a.m. until 10:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Tuesday through Saturday: from 2:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m.; and 
(3)  Sunday: from 12:01 a.m. until 12:30 p.m.; provided that, the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday under this subsection shall also be subject to and governed by section 6-28(b). 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 1286, § I, 12-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Hours of sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; private clubs authorized to sell alcohol on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2; Sunday sales of wine at farm wineries, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. 
Sec. 6-25. - Visibility. 
(a)  The business or premises of each licensee shall have a clearly marked point(s) of entry. 
(b)  The business or premises of each licensee shall have point(s) of entry that are clearly visible from a public street; however, this requirement shall not apply to hotels or where the point of entry of the licensed business or premises is in a shopping center or business building. 
(c)  The business or premises of each licensee shall ensure that, at all points of entry, there are clear windows and doors. Further, the business or premises of each licensee must maintain clear windows and doors for any cashier's cage within the premises, or other internally enclosed space. 
(d)  The business or premises of each licensee, including those entirely enclosed in another building, such as a restaurant located in a hotel, must keep all windows and doors free of visual obstructions so that the interior of such business or premises is clearly visible from the exterior. No tinting, shades, curtains, blinds or other devices shall be used to obstruct the view into the such business or premises, but tinting, shades, curtains, blinds, and other devices may be used to reduce sun glare so long as such measures do not impede visual access to the business or premises. 
(e)  The business or premises of each licensee shall operate with an adequate level of internal lighting, so as to ensure visual access from the exterior and safety to law enforcement or other emergency responders, 24 hours, a day seven days a week. External lighting cannot be solely used to meet this requirement. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-26. - Completeness, denial and re-submittal of application. 
(a)  No license application shall be considered until the city clerk deems the same complete as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  If the license application is denied, the same or substantially same license application cannot be resubmitted for a period of six months from the date of the denial. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-27. - Production of records; audits. 
(a)  In conjunction with any license application, or in conjunction with the issuance of any license, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected under this chapter, the city clerk shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, electronic or magnetic media or documents and associated software, and reports or invoices in any form of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving any ground or any violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or showing payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees or charges as contemplated by this chapter. 
(b)  All licensees shall maintain the following records for a period of three years from the issuance of any license and make the original records, or certified copies thereof, available to the city manager for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts and invoices showing liquor, beer, malt beverages and wine separately; 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts; 
(4)  Monthly Georgia Sales and Use Tax Reports; and 
(5)  Federal Income Tax Returns with all Form 1099s. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-28. - Sunday sales licenses. 
(a)  A retail dealer of alcoholic beverages by the package may apply for and obtain a Sunday sales license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package upon due qualification for and payment for such license, as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  A retail dealer of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only may apply for and obtain a Sunday sales license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only, upon the occurrence of the following: (1) due qualification for and payment for such license, as set forth in this chapter; and (2) showing to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his designee, that such retail dealer derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishments where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 1286, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Secs. 6-29—6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Beer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-50. - Authority to sell; license required. 
A license for a retail dealer or wholesale dealer for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine may be granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions as provided in this article. Further, a license for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only may be granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions as provided in this article. No person will be issued a license for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine, where the same is sold in the original packages, and a license for the sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only, at the same location. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-51. - License fees. 
Before any license permitted under this article is granted by the city council, the license applicant shall comply with all regulations adopted by the city council applicable to such licenses and pay the applicable license fee by certified bank check in an amount set by resolution or ordinance by the city council and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Maximum license fee, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-52. - Excise taxes on beer and malt beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of beer and malt beverages within the city, a specific excise tax as follows: 
(1)  Where beer and malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; and 
(2)  Where beer and malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in beer and malt beverages. Each wholesale dealer selling beer and malt beverages within the city shall file a report with the city by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of beer and malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month after the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Required municipal excise tax on beer, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 6-53. - Excise taxes on wine. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of wine within the city, a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
(4)  Wine which contains less than one-half of one percent alcohol. 
(c)  The excise taxes as provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in wine, and each wholesale dealer of wine within the city shall file a report with the clerk by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month after the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with subsection (b) of section 6-52. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipal excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 6-54. - Sale without license; separate application and separate license required for each premises. 
Beer, malt beverages and/or wine shall not be distributed, sold or possessed for the purposes of sale without a license granted by the city council. A separate application must be made, and a separate license must be obtained, to sell beer, malt beverages and/or wine for each premises where beer, malt beverages and/or wine is sold at retail or wholesale, or where beer, malt beverages and/or wine is sold at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-55. - Limitation regarding licenses for retail sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
A license for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only shall be issued only in conjunction with a restaurant, hotel or public club and where a restaurant, hotel or public club is within the commercial zoning districts described in section 6-8. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-56. - Reporting requirements for restaurants. 
(a)  Where a license is issued for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages and/or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only, in conjunction with a restaurant, the licensee of such license shall submit quarterly written reports to the city clerk, as more particularly set forth herein. 
(b)  Every report shall be post marked on or before the last day of the calendar month after the calendar quarter. 
(c)  Every report shall be in a form recognized and accepted by certified public accountants and shall utilize common and generally recognized accounting principles and shall be submitted under oath. False information in any report may result in the prosecution under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Every report shall clearly indicate all sales receipts of the restaurant for food and alcoholic beverages, and for reporting purposes, food shall be defined as all edible substances appropriate for human consumption as determined by the health department inspecting the city's restaurants as sold or provided to the public in a restaurant. Food shall not be construed to include olives, cherries, limes, lemons, salt, pepper, pineapples, celery, tomato juice, or any other fruit or vegetable, or any dairy product such as ice cream, cream, yogurt or milk, or any soft drink, water, tonic water or non-alcoholic carbonated or non-carbonated beverages, when such items are used in any alcoholic beverage or mixed drink as a essential part of the beverage, mixed drink, or as a garnish thereon. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if any report of a restaurant shows that its sales receipts for food comprise less than 51 percent of a restaurant's total gross sales receipts in any quarter of a calendar year, then, thereafter, the city council may consider such event as cause for probation, suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-57. - Proximity to church buildings, schools or school grounds. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this article where the entrance to a place of business or premises for the wholesale sale of beer, malt beverages or wine is located within 100 yards of the entrance to any church building or the property line of any school or school grounds. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this article where the entrance to a place of business or premises for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine in original packages is located within 100 yards of the entrance to any church building or the property line of any school or school grounds. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this article where the entrance to a place of business or premises for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises only is located within 25 feet of the entrance to any church building or the property line of any school or school grounds. In this subsection, a church building is defined as a free-standing structure, originally built for use as a church, and a church building does not include a commercial or retail building or space that has been converted for occupancy by a church or for religious purposes. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured as provided in section 6-23. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3). 
Sec. 6-58. - Wholesaler's delivery to licensed retail dealer; marking of vehicles. 
No beer, malt beverages and/or wine shall be delivered to any licensed retail dealer except by a licensed wholesale dealer, who shall make such deliveries by a vehicle owned by the wholesaler, with wholesaler's name clearly marked on the outside of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-59. - Machines operated for amusement purposes in licensed retail businesses. 
No person with a license for the retail sale of beer, malt beverages or wine shall permit on his premises any coin operated amusement machine, including but not limited to a slot machine, mechanical music box or pinball machine, or any form of electronic or mechanical game machine or coin-operated device, which might be used for entertainment or amusement purposes, except pursuant to applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 6-60—6-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PACKAGED DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 6-70. - Authority to sell; license required. 
A license for the retail sale or wholesale sale of distilled spirits by the original package may be granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions as provided in this article. No person may hold a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package and a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only at the same location. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-71. - License fee; excise tax in addition to retail license fee. 
(a)  Before any license permitted under this article is granted by the city council, the license applicant shall comply with all regulations adopted by the city council applicable to such licenses and pay the applicable license fee by certified bank check in an amount set by resolution or ordinance by the city council and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(b)  In addition to the license fees established by this section, there is hereby levied and imposed a specific excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package within the city, in the amount of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. The excise tax as provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits by the package. The payment and filing of returns requirements of such wholesale dealer shall be as provided in subsection (b) of section 6-52. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-72. - Application for license to be accompanied by sworn statement regarding additional information. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this article, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information describing any and all interests, as defined by state law, in the person licensed or to be licensed. This information shall include the names and addresses of any person who has any ownership interest in the person licensed or to be licensed and the size of such interest; the specific street address of any other premises which is authorized for retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package in which the person licensed or to be licensed has any ownership interest; detailed description of the ownership or leasehold of premises where the person licensed or to be licensed is or will be operating, including but not limited to an executed copy of the vesting deed or lease; and the name and address of any owner and lessor of the premises in which the person licensed or to be licensed is or will be operating. 
(b)  Any change in the information required in subsection (a) must be filed with the city clerk when the change occurs, and failure to do so within a period of ten days if such change shall be grounds for denial, probation, suspension or revocation, as may apply, by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-73. - Proximity to church buildings, schools or school grounds. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this article where an entrance to the place of business or premises for wholesale or retail sale of distilled spirits is located as follows: 
(1)  Within 100 yards of the entrance of any church building; or 
(2)  Within 200 yards of the property line of any school or school grounds. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured as provided in section 6-23. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-74. - Places where retail sales permitted. 
(a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in: 
(1)  Retail businesses or premises in which space has been set aside and devoted substantially to the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to, and only to, the exterior of the buildings in which the business or premises is located and not any other enclosed part of the building in which such business or premises is located, except as provided hereafter. 
(2)  Hotels and office buildings where: 
a.  Every public entrance to such business or premises shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; and 
b.  No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure. 
(b)  Each license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of his business or premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the distilled spirits offered for sale, provided that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed price list, may have the prices placed on the bottles or on the front of the shelf where distilled spirits are exhibited for sale. 
(c)  No exterior signs may be used to advertise the price of any distilled spirits offered for sale at the business or premises of a person licensed for retail sale of distilled spirits by the package. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-75. - Machines operated for amusement purposes in licensed retail businesses. 
No person with a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package shall permit on his premises any coin operated amusement machine, including but not limited to a slot machine, mechanical music box or pinball machine, or any form of electronic or mechanical game machine or coin-operated device, which might be used for entertainment or amusement purposes, except pursuant to applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-76. - Signs and display of license. 
(a)  Signs advertising or promoting the sale of distilled spirits by the package are permitted within the city, in accordance with this chapter and as otherwise permitted in the Code. 
(b)  The license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be displayed on a front window or entrance of the licensed premises, with the name of the licensee, together with the inscription "City of Lyons License for Retail Sale of Distilled Spirits by the Package, No. _____," and the letters, numbers and symbols on the license shall be not less than four inches, nor more than eight inches, in height. 
(c)  The license shall at all times be kept in plain view within the licensed premises or business. 
Sec. 6-77. - Persons with financial interest in wholesale dealer license; wholesaler's delivery to licensed retail dealer; marking of vehicles. 
(a)  No person who has any financial interest in a wholesale dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be issued any license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package. 
(b)  No distilled spirits shall be delivered to any licensed retail dealer in the city except by a licensed wholesale dealer, who shall make such deliveries by a vehicle owned by the wholesaler, with the wholesaler's name clearly marked on the outside of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 6-78—6-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK FOR CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES ONLY 

Sec. 6-90. - Authority to sell; license required. 
A license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only may be granted by the city council, upon the terms and conditions as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-91. - License fees. 
Before any license permitted under this article is granted by the city council, the license applicant shall comply with all regulations adopted by the city council applicable to such license and pay the applicable license fee by certified bank check in an amount set by resolution or ordinance by the city council and maintained as a public document by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-92. - Separate application and separate license required for each premises. 
A separate application must be made, and a separate license must be obtained, for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only for each premises where distilled spirits are sold at retail by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-93. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons issued a license for retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only shall not be licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-94. - Limitation regarding licenses for retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises only. 
A license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only shall be issued only in conjunction with a restaurant, hotel or public club and where the restaurant, hotel or public club is within the commercial zoning districts described in section 6-8. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-95. - Reporting requirements for restaurants. 
(a)  Where a license is issued for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only, in conjunction with a restaurant, the licensee of such license shall submit quarterly written reports to the city clerk, as more particularly set forth herein. 
(b)  Every report shall be post marked on or before the last day of the calendar month after the calendar quarter. 
(c)  Every report shall be in a form recognized and accepted by certified public accountants and shall utilize common and generally recognized accounting principles and shall be submitted under oath. False information in any report may result in the prosecution under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Every report shall clearly indicate all sales receipts of the restaurant for food and alcoholic beverages, and for reporting purposes, food shall be defined as all edible substances appropriate for human consumption as determined by the health department inspecting the city's restaurants as sold or provided to the public in a restaurant. Food shall not be construed to include olives, cherries, limes, lemons, salt, pepper, pineapples, celery, tomato juice, or any other fruit or vegetable, or any dairy product such as ice cream, cream, yogurt or milk, or any soft drink, water, tonic water or non-alcoholic carbonated or non-carbonated beverages, when such items are used in any alcoholic beverage or mixed drink as a essential part of the beverage, mixed drink, or as a garnish thereon. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if any report of a restaurant shows that its sales receipts for food comprise less than 51 percent of a restaurant's total gross sales receipts in any quarter of a calendar year, then, thereafter, the city council may consider such event as cause for probation, suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-96. - Proximity to church buildings, schools or school grounds. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this article where the entrance to a place of business or premises for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only is located within 25 feet of the entrance to any church building or the property line of any school or school grounds. In this section, a church building is defined as a free-standing structure, originally built for use as a church, and a church building does not include a commercial or retail building or space that has been converted for occupancy by a church or for religious purposes. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured as provided in section 6-23. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-97. - Machines operated for amusement purposes in licensed retail businesses. 
No person with a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only shall permit on his premises any coin operated amusement machine, including but not limited to a slot machine, mechanical music box or pinball machine, or any form of electronic or mechanical game machine or coin-operated device, which might be used for entertainment or amusement purposes, except pursuant to applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 6-98. - Wholesaler's delivery to licensed retail dealer; marking of vehicles. 
No distilled spirits shall be delivered to any licensed retail dealer except by a licensed wholesale dealer, who shall make such deliveries by a vehicle owned by the wholesaler, with wholesaler's name clearly marked on the outside of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 6-99—6-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TEMPORARY LICENSES 

Sec. 6-110. - Nonprofit corporations eligible for temporary licenses. 
A nonprofit corporation or organization may apply to the city council for a temporary license limited to the retail sale of wine, malt beverages and/or beer for consumption on the premises only. As a condition to the granting of the temporary license, the nonprofit corporation or organization shall provide written proof to the city clerk of its status as a duly authorized, operating and existing corporation or organization (such proof includes a valid certificate of incorporation from the Georgia Secretary of State and a certificate of 501(c)(3) status from the Internal Revenue Service). The nonprofit corporation or organization will comply with article I of this chapter, though it is not required to operate as a restaurant or public club, and no temporary license shall be granted for a period longer than three consecutive days or more than four times in any calendar year. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, each temporary license fee shall be $250.00. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 6-111—6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANNUAL LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 6-126. - Establishment of annual license fees. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed an annual license fee, payable at the time of issuance of any license under this chapter and any renewal thereof, as follows: 
For wholesale dealers: 
Wholesale: Beer or malt beverages ..... $ 100.00 
Wholesale: Wine ..... 100.00 
Wholesale: Distilled spirits ..... 100.00 
For retail dealers: 
By the drink for consumption on the premises: Beer or malt beverages ..... 300.00 
By the drink for consumption on the premises: Wine ..... 300.00 
By the drink for consumption on the premises: Distilled spirits ..... 650.00 
By the drink for consumption on the premises on Sunday: Beer or malt beverages ..... 50.00 
By the drink for consumption on the premises on Sunday: Wine ..... 50.00 
By the drink for consumption on the premises on Sunday: Distilled spirits ..... 350.00 
Retail package: Beer or malt beverages ..... 150.00 
Retail package: Wine ..... 150.00 
Retail package: Distilled spirits ..... 3,000.00 
Retail package on Sunday: Beer or malt beverages ..... 0.00 
Retail package on Sunday: Wine ..... 0.00 
Retail package on Sunday: Distilled spirits ..... 0.00 
(b)  The license fees imposed by this section are regulatory fees intended to offset the city's cost in administering and enforcing this chapter. In addition thereto, licensees are subject to payment of any occupational tax as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 1286, § II, 12-19-2017) 
Secs. 6-127—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 6-151. - Grandfather clause. 
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the city council's enactment of this chapter will not revoke or suspend the existing license of a licensee who, as of the date of the enactment of this chapter, holds a license for retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only and whose business or premises may not qualify as a restaurant or public club under this chapter. However, except as provided herein, upon the city council's enactment of this chapter, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all parts of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 6-152—6-170. - Reserved. 
Chapters 7—9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; disposal of dead animals, § 58-34. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any animal which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such private property and unattended or uncared for. An animal shall also be considered abandoned if the animal shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal and unattended or without proper food and water for a period in excess of 36 hours. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center means the facility designated by the city manager for the detention of animals. 
Animal control superintendent means that person designated by the city manager to perform the duties prescribed by this chapter. 
Animal under restraint means any animal: 
(1)  Secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by a fence or other enclosure; 
(2)  Under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands—that person being actually present with the animal; or 
(3)  Confined within a parked vehicle or a vehicle in motion. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept as a pet for pleasure, rather than utility. Pets include but are not limited to birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Domesticated animal means any animal which is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans, including but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command or any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Owner means any person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
Vicious animal means: 
(1)  Any animal with a propensity, tendency or disposition to: 
a.  Attack; 
b.  Cause injury to; or 
c.  Otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals. 
(2)  Any animal which attacks a human being or other domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or 
(3)  Any pit bull terrier, which is defined as any Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog or any mixed breed of dog which contains an element of the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier by a qualified veterinarian duly licensed as such by the state. 
(Code 1977, § 4-22) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the city's inhabitants. This chapter sets forth necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of animals which threaten the safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards and all areas of the city; and the lack of knowledge or intent is not a defense in the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 4-21) 
Sec. 10-3. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  Any animal is declared to be a public nuisance if the animal: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of section 10-4, 10-5, or 10-6; 
(2)  Is vicious, as defined in section 10-1, and while on the property of its owner is not kept enclosed by a fence at least five feet in height, the sides of which are embedded into the ground no less than one foot and the gate of which is secured by a child-proof lock, and restrained by a leash or chain to prevent it from wandering out of the confined area or while, off the real property of its owner, is not muzzled and kept secured by a leash or chain held by a competent person; 
(3)  Produces, because of quality, manner or method in which the animal is domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Makes or causes frequent or long continued noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; or 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 4-23) 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his custody to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the city streets and highways or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of the property or of the person in possession of that property. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of subsection (a) of this section are as follows: 
(1)  First offense ..... $ 25.00 
(2)  Second offense ..... 50.00 
(3)  Third offense ..... 100.00 
(4)  Fourth offense ..... 200.00 
(Code 1977, §§ 4-24, 4-28(d)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Restraint on property. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal or anyone having any animal in his possession or custody to ensure that the animal is enclosed by a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by a chain or leash or in some other physical manner or under control by a competent person so that it cannot wander off the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian, except as provided in this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter that all animals be prevented from leaving while unattended the real property limits of their owners, possessors or custodians. 
(Code 1977, § 4-25) 
Sec. 10-6. - Restraint while off property. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his possession to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. For the purpose of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; is secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person; or is properly confined within an enclosure with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(Code 1977, § 4-26) 
Sec. 10-7. - Prohibited in city parks and buildings. 
Animals are prohibited in city parks and city buildings; provided, however, that: 
(1)  Every totally or partially blind person shall have the right to be accompanied by a guide dog, and every physically disabled person and every deaf person shall have the right to be accompanied by a service dog, especially trained for the purpose, in any city park or city building; provided, however, that such person shall be liable for any damage done to the premises or facilities by such dog. The guide dog or service dog must be identified as having been trained by a school for Seeing Eye, hearing, service or guide dogs. 
(2)  Every person engaged in the training of a guide dog or service dog for the purpose of accompanying a person as provided in subsection (1) of this section shall have the same right to be accompanied by such dog being trained as the totally or partially blind person, deaf person or physically disabled person has under subsection (1) of this section so long as such trainer is identified as an agent or employee of a school for Seeing Eye, hearing, service or guide dogs. 
(Code 1977, § 4-24.1) 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Right of disabled persons to use dogs in certain places, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-2. 
Sec. 10-8. - Wild animal permit. 
(a)  No person shall have, keep or maintain any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal or reptile without first applying to and receiving from the police department a permit. The charge for this permit shall be $10.00. No such permit shall be issued if a permit required by O.C.G.A. title 27, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1 et seq.) has not been obtained. 
(b)  The police department is invested with the authority to issue a permit to any person for the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal or reptile when, in the opinion of the police chief, any such animal or reptile may be kept or maintained without menacing the safety of any person or property. However, the police department may require any such animal or reptile to be properly caged or secured or may make additional rules or regulations regarding the keeping or maintaining of any such animal or reptile and may revoke any permit for any violation of any of the sections of this chapter or of any of the rules and regulations of the police department or when, in the opinion of the police chief, the safety of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of any such animal or reptile. 
(Code 1977, §§ 4-38, 4-39) 
Sec. 10-9. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The city is declared a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, destroy, harm or molest wild birds or fowl or their nests or eggs, except when a nuisance or threat to the public health exists, and then only as authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 4-1) 
Sec. 10-10. - Legal number of dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person in charge of a residence to keep or allow to be kept more than four dogs or four cats, or any combination of such animals exceeding four in number, over the age of 120 days at such residence unless the residence of all of the dogs and cats kept there are within a licensed kennel. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.6) 
Secs. 10-11—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 10-36. - Animal control center. 
The city council shall designate an area to be known as the city animal control center. 
(Code 1977, § 4-29(a)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Animal control superintendent. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a person to be known as animal control superintendent to supervise such other persons necessary to operate the animal control center. 
(b)  The animal control superintendent shall be charged with responsibilities, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Cooperating with the rabies control officer and county board of health and assisting in the enforcement of state laws with regard to dogs and especially with regard to the vaccination of such dogs against rabies and the confinement or leashing of vicious dogs; 
(2)  Investigating all complaints regarding animals; 
(3)  Issuing warning citations to offenders of this chapter; 
(4)  Enforcing, only through duly authorized personnel, all state laws, this Code and city ordinances for the care, control and custody of animals; 
(5)  Exacting, collecting, reporting and remitting fees and costs; and 
(6)  Supervising and being in charge of the city animal control center. 
(Code 1977, § 4-29(b), (c)) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 10-38. - Violations. 
Upon information made known to the chief of police that any owner of any animal is in violation of this chapter, he shall cause a summons to be issued requiring such owner of such animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this chapter. If a violation of this chapter has been personally witnessed to the chief of police, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-28(a)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Impoundment, redemption and destruction of animals. 
(a)  Except as stated in this section, any animal within the city without an owner, any animal running at large at any time or any animal within the city whose owner fails to have the animal vaccinated by a rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian, in accordance with state laws, shall be impounded or confined in the animal control center for a period of 120 hours. Any animal not redeemed in accordance with this section shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, an animal running at large unattended and whose owner is known shall be taken to the owner's residence. If no adult person shall be present, it shall be taken to the animal control center. In either event, a redemption fee shall be paid by the owner in an amount of $25.00. 
(c)  If the owner of any animal is not known and such animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds or other public places or premises or upon the property of another without the property owner's permission as prohibited by this chapter, upon complaint made to or information made known to the animal control department, it shall be the duty of the animal control superintendent to take possession of the animal and impound it in the animal control center as provided in this section. 
(d)  No later than two days after any animal has been taken to the animal control center, notice shall be given to its owner or, if the owner is unknown, notice shall be posted for five days, or until the animal is disposed of, on a bulletin board at city hall with a description of the animal and the time and place of taking the animal, together with the time and date of posting the notice. The time for the redemption of the animal as provided in this section shall not begin to run until such notice has been given or posted. 
(e)  In order for an owner to redeem an animal, the owner must have the animal fully vaccinated for rabies by an authorized rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian, if it has not been so vaccinated within one year from the redemption date, and shall pay a penalty in the amount of $10.00, plus the applicable fees as follows: 
(1)  Receiving at the pound ..... $10.00 
(2)  Housing, per day ..... 5.00 
(3)  Redemption ..... 25.00 
(f)  Any proceeds thus derived by the animal control center shall be turned over to the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, §§ 4-28(b), (c), 4-30, 4-31) 
Secs. 10-40—10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-66. - Vaccinations for rabies. 
All dogs within the incorporated city limits shall be inoculated by a licensed veterinarian for the prevention of rabies. 
(Code 1977, § 4-27) 
Sec. 10-67. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and prominently post the following notice on the outside of the property: 
Warning  Guard Dog 
The notice shall be in either red or black letters upon a white background, large enough to be easily read at a distance of 25 feet. If the dog is in a building, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. If the guard dog is located in a general enclosure, the notices shall be conspicuously posted upon the enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon each and every entrance and exit through the enclosure. If the guard dog is solely located within an apartment, a condominium or a building within a larger building, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 4-32) 
Sec. 10-68. - Impoundment of rabies suspect or diseased dogs. 
Any dog impounded which appears to be suffering from rabies or is affected with hydrophobia shall not be redeemed but shall be kept for ten days under observation. Thereafter if the animal control officer determines that the dog is affected with the disease, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane manner. Otherwise it shall be subject to redemption as provided in this chapter. Any dog which is suffering from any infectious, contagious or dangerous disease may be redeemed by the owner in order to provide proper treatment for the dog. 
(Code 1977, § 4-33) 
Sec. 10-69. - Confinement for symptoms of rabies or for biting. 
(a)  Any dog which shows symptoms of rabies or which has bitten anyone shall be penned up immediately by its custodian, and the animal control center shall be notified immediately. The dog shall be confined in a place approved by the animal control superintendent and under conditions approved by him for not less than ten days, and the dog shall be subject to observation at all times during this period by a person designated by the animal control superintendent. 
(b)  If rabies does not develop within this period, the dog shall be released to its owner. If rabies does develop, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Code 1977, § 4-34) 
Secs. 10-70—10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-76. - Requirements for possessing vicious dog or potentially vicious dogs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state and the City of Lyons a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code section. This certificate shall be in addition to any standard dog license and fees or other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this Code section for vicious dogs, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or the dog control officer other wise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the vicious dog or potentially vicious dog, section 10-3. 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the vicious dog or potentially vicious dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a vicious dog on the property. This sign shall be designed by the department of natural resources and shall be posted in a conspicuous place so that it may be seen by the general public. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a vicious dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the vicious dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $50,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog shall notify the dog control officer within eight hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has dies or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)  The owner of a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the City of Lyons. The owner of a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog who moves from this city to another jurisdiction with the state of Georgia shall register the vicious dog or potentially vicious dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsections (b) or (c) of this section are maintained by the owner of a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  A dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  The City of Lyons does hereby levy and charge against the owner of any vicious dog for the purpose of registration pursuant to this section, and in addition to any other license fees required generally for dogs within the city, the sum of $25.00 as a fee to register the dog as a vicious dog pursuant to the ordinances of the city. All certificates of registration shall be renewed on and annual basis. Annual renewal shall be at such time as all other business license is due (January 1—March 31). At the time of any renewal, the animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the vicious dog, or potentially vicious dog, is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with all of the provisions of this Code which might apply to this situation. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.1) 
Sec. 10-77. - Restrictions on permitting vicious or potentially vicious dogs to be outside proper enclosure. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially vicious dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.2) 
Sec. 10-78. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the city: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by subsection 10-76(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered by section subsection 10-76(a); 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of subsection 10-3(a)(2) 
(b)  A potentially vicious dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a vicious dog if the dog violates any part of section 10-3. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this Code section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 120 hours the animal control officer will follow guidelines set forth in section 10-39. (Impoundment, redemption and destruction of animals) 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.3) 
Sec. 10-79. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a vicious dog who violates the applicable provisions of sections 10-76 or 10-77 or whose vicious dog is subject to confiscation under subsection 10-78(a), be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(b)  The owner of a potentially vicious dog who violates the applicable provisions of sections 10-76 or 10-77 or whose potentially vicious dog is subject to confiscation under subsection 10-78(a), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. 
(c)  If an owner who has a previous conviction for a violation of this article knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this division, such owner shall be guilty of a felony if the owner's vicious dog attacks or bites a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this division. The owner of a vicious dog who is convicted for a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties for violations under subsection (c) or (d) herein, the vicious dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the city and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and, thereafter, the vicious dog shall be destroyed in and expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  No owner of a vicious dog shall be held criminally liable under this division for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's properties. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.4) 
Sec. 10-80. - Liability for damages. 
It is the intent of the State of Georgia and the City of Lyons that the owner of a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog shall be solely liable for injury to or death of a person caused by such a dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this division be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers and injury inflicted by a dog or by a dog that has been identified as being a vicious or potentially vicious dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a vicious or potentially vicious dog or by a dog that the city has failed to identify as a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in subsection 10-3(2) or by a vicious dog or potentially vicious dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required by subsection 10-76(c). Enacted by GA. L. 1989, p. 159, section 5). 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006, § 10-2.5) 
Secs. 10-81—10-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 10-96. - Keeping, maintaining, raising or feeding. 
It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, raise or feed any livestock within the city, except as authorized in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-97. - Maximum period for keeping or maintaining. 
Except as authorized in this article, it shall be unlawful to maintain or keep or cause to be maintained or kept within the city any livestock for any purpose whatsoever for a period longer than 48 hours, including the keeping or maintaining of any such animals for the purpose of sale or shipping. 
(Code 1977, § 4-3) 
Sec. 10-98. - Animal hospital conditions. 
(a)  Livestock, while under medical treatment at an animal hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian, may be kept within the city only when: 
(1)  Screened in; 
(2)  Proper fly extermination measures are practiced; 
(3)  The city sewer system is not stopped up or damaged in carrying off the waste products of such animals; and 
(4)  The premises are maintained in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Any animal hospital shall use a flow of water in cleaning the premises sufficient to prevent stopping and clogging up the city sewer system. In addition to punishment of the offending party as provided in section 1-7, the city shall assess the offending party with the full expense to the city, including labor and materials, caused by stoppage of the sewer system due to waste products of any animals. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to maintain any animal hospital in the city without having first obtained a certificate or written statement from the state health department that proper sanitary standards are maintained. 
(Code 1977, §§ 4-4—4-6) 
Secs. 10-99—10-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRUELTY AND RELATED OFFENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-126. - Teasing, molesting and poisoning. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait, poison or in any way bother any animal not belonging to him or legally under his control. 
(Code 1977, § 4-35) 
Sec. 10-127. - Notice of injury to companion animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person injuring a companion animal by running over it or into the animal or coming into contact with it with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle to fail to immediately notify the owner of the animal, the animal control center or the police department. 
(Code 1977, § 4-36) 
Sec. 10-128. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any animal within the city. Each person who does abandon knowingly or who willingly permits such abandonment or who aids in the abandonment of any animal shall be in violation of the law. 
(Code 1977, § 4-37) 
Chapters 11—13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 14, 2015, amended ch. 14 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-5 and § 14-31 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 5-2—5-5, 5-40, and §§ 21-51—21-54 of the 1977 Code and a resolution adopted Nov. 2, 2004. 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited in city parks and buildings, § 10-7; blighted property, § 26-56 et seq.; derelict property, § 26-90 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; fire prevention code, § 30-2; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Fire district. 
The city fire district shall comprise the central business district as defined and delineated in the zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-2. - Permit fees. 
The fees to be charged for any permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1); Ord. of 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 14-3. - Water conservation requirements for certain plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and includes the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but does not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  There shall not be initiated within this city the construction of any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  There shall not be initiated within this city the construction of any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(d)  The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes the replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  The requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, relative to new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building, shall apply under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewer system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewer system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; 
(3)  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(f)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (e)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to any construction of a residential building, the contract for which was entered into prior to April 1, 1992, and shall not apply to any construction of a commercial building, the contract for which was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
(h)  Any person who installs any toilet, faucet, urinal, or showerhead in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(i)  The sale of a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush shall be prohibited. 
(j)  This section shall be enforced by the building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-4. - Display of house or building numbers. 
House or buildings numbers shall be clearly displayed on all houses or buildings, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code section, punishable by a $10.00 fine. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Secs. 14-5—14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-41. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Codes which are to be enforced by city manager or his designated representatives. The minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(VIII), to-wit: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); and 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC); 
Which codes have mandatory statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the city manager, his designated representative, or designee(s) thereof, in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  Adoption of optional codes; enumeration. There is hereby adopted within the city the optional state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(IX)—(X), to-wit: 
(1)  International Existing Building Code (ICC); and 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC); 
(c)  The codes provided in subparts (a) and (b) of this section shall mean the current edition of such codes as approved by board of community affairs, within the state department of community affairs, including any new edition of any such code as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23; and provided, further, that any such codes may hereafter be amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23 and all amendments or appendices of such codes are hereby adopted and deemed included or incorporated herein. All references to "State Minimum Standard Codes" shall include the Georgia State Amendments promulgated by the board of community affairs and any local amendments approved by said board. 
(d)  Whenever the International Fire Code (ICC), as approved by the board of community affairs, is applicable, any state minimum standard code provision shall not be less restrictive than the Georgia State Fire Code, as adopted by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(e)  The city manager or his designee shall make copies of relevant sections of the codes enforced or adopted in this section available to members of the general public, in printed or written format, at such price as it deems reasonable, to defray the costs of publication and handling. Due to copyright limitations, copying or duplication of some codes may be restricted. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-42. - Duties and responsibilities of city manager or his designated representatives. 
(a)  Primary administration and enforcement of construction codes is vested in the city manager, who may appoint one or more building inspectors and delegate such functions as the manager, in his discretion, deems appropriate. Where more than one building inspector is employed, the manager may designate a chief building inspector to administratively head the department of building and code enforcement. The manager, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes: 
(1)  To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the city in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this article; 
(2)  To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to assure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)  Under the budget and personnel regulations of said city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)  To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)  To study and make recommendations to the city council on ordinances relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)  To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the manager and his designated representatives, set forth in this section, may, by private or intergovernmental contract approved by the city council, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by the city manager or his designated representative of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. When such contract has been entered and spread upon the official minutes of the commission, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city as if fully performed directly by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-43. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Secs. 14-44—14-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-66. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm, corporation, company or other entity, or any agent of such person, firm, corporation, company or other entity, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such building or structure from the city, except as may otherwise be allowed by this chapter. Separate permits are required for grading, electrical, plumbing and/or gas. 
(b)  Fees. Permit fees shall be set forth in a schedule approved by the city council, pursuant to ordinance or resolution, and may be revised from time to time. 
(c)  Term. Permits shall generally be good for six months from date of issuance; provided, that if the work is not completed within the initial permit term, but has been diligently pursued, the permit may be extended, without additional charge, for successive three-month terms, so long as the work continues to be diligently prosecuted. 
(d)  Revocation for suspension or abandonment. If work authorized by a permit is suspended or abandoned, after the initial term, for a period of 30 days, without good cause shown to the city manager or his designated representative, the permit may be revoked upon written notification to the permit holder. Revocations of permits for abandonment are not appealable to the city council. 
(e)  State licensing required. Persons engaging in construction, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, low-voltage or utility contracting on any work within the city are required to possess a license issued by the state construction licensing industry board as a condition for performing the work; provided, however, the owner of a single-family dwelling performing work (other than utility contracting) within a dwelling occupied by him as his personal residence, shall be exempt from state licensing. Where a state license is required, every applicant for a permit shall furnish proof, at time of application, that he or the person contracted to do the work holds a valid state license in good standing. Failure to meet this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-67. - Written documentation; payment of fee required for issuance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, in addition to the information requested on the permit application, the city manager or his designated representative may require tests, plans and specifications, plats, and other written documentation from engineers, architects, surveyors, and other professionals to assure that full compliance with all permitting requirements of the state minimum standard codes and applicable laws have been met. No permits shall issue on any project where the structure to be built or improved thereon is a "special hazard structure" or the use to be conducted therein is a "special hazard use", without first obtaining the approval of building plans by the state fire marshal's office. Where a project is subject to permitting under the state soil erosion and sedimentation control law, no permit shall issue for any land-disturbance activity unless approved plans are received from the district soil conservation office and all required stabilization facilities are in place, and ready for inspection. All buildings and structures intended for human occupancy shall have a safe source of drinking water and sanitary disposal; no permit shall issue for any building or structure which does not have access to public water and sewer unless plans for a well and/or septic tank have been approved by the county health department. All permits shall be conditioned upon the application and supporting data, which is deemed incorporated into and made a material part or term of the permission granted. No permit shall issue until all requisite fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-68. - Cessation of work. 
Upon notice from the city manager or his designated representative, work on any building, structure, system or component therein, that is being done contrary to the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or in violation of any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given in writing, directed to the owner of the property and to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency situation exists, the city manager or his designated representative shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-69. - Revocation of permit for false statement or misrepresentation. 
The city manager or his designated representative may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article in the event he finds there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The city manager or his designated representative may also revoke a permit upon determining that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of the building or structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of state minimum standard codes; provided, the work was stopped in accordance with section 14-68 and the permittee has not met the conditions for resuming the work after a reasonable period for compliance has been granted. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-70. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or whenever the city manager or his designated representative has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the city manager or his designated representative, may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this article; provided, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or occupant. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city manager or his designated representative may apply to the judge of the municipal court of the city for an administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-71. - Service of notices, decisions, orders, rulings; appeals. 
All notices, decisions, orders and rulings of the city manager or his designated representative shall be in writing and served upon the applicant, permit holder, owner of property affected or his agent, and, if applicable, persons in possession or occupancy of affected premises. Where such notices, decisions, orders or rulings cannot be personally served, service shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address as shown on official government records. Any party aggrieved by a notice, decision, order or ruling of the city manager or his designated representative may seek review thereof by filing a written petition for certiorari in the superior court of Toombs County, Georgia, within 30 days of filing of such notice, decision, order or ruling with the city clerk; provided, however, in any case where the city manager or his designated representative has issued a notice, decision, order or ruling for the repair, closing or vacating of a building or structure on grounds it is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous so as to constitute a public nuisance, no review may be had until the municipal court has entered its final order in the nuisance abatement proceeding. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-72. - Variances. 
In those limited circumstances where the state minimum construction codes allow a local variance based upon hardship, the city council may, upon finding that strict enforcement of the state minimum standard codes would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of such codes and the public interest, grant a variance, subject to finding, in writing, all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or system involved and which are not applicable to others similarly situated; 
(2)  That the special condition and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting a variance will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by the codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of such codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Applications for variance shall be advertised not less than 15 days prior to conducting an evidentiary hearing before the city council. Such hearing shall be informally conducted, with the applicant having the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence. Each decision of the city council shall recite the factual findings underlying its decision and the reasons for such decision. In granting a variance, the city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the codes, including a reasonable time limit in which the variance is required to be commenced or completed, or both. A copy of the city council's written decision shall immediately be filed in its minutes of the hearing at which the variance was considered and a copy promptly served upon all affected parties. Decisions of the city council shall be final, subject to review by petition for certiorari to the superior court of Toombs County, Georgia, filed within 30 days of entry of the written decision. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-73. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation, company or other entity, or any agent of such person, firm, corporation, company or other entity, who shall violate any provision of the state minimum standard codes, or the permissive codes and construction standards adopted by this article, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished any building, structure, or system therein in violation of this Code section shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of this city. If convicted, such violation shall be subject to any of the penalties as set forth in section 1-7 of this Code. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this article is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Continuing violations of this article are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction by a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Sec. 14-74. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of interpretation of the state minimum standard codes, the definitions of terms found in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 shall control over the definitions of the same or similar terms as found in such codes or this article. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(1)) 
Secs. 14-75—14-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NEW AND PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 14-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings prescribed to them in this section. 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a new manufactured home or pre-owned manufactured home in the incorporated area of the city. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the city building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by paragraphs a. and b. of subsection (1) of section 14-88 of this article reasonably portray or represent the existing condition of the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the incorporated areas of The City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air- conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling or for any other purpose and has been titled. 
New manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been built as a residential dwelling or for any other purpose and has been titled. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 1, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-87. - Conditions. 
All new manufactured homes and pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-88. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy, moving, abandoning and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the city: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 18-89 of this article; 
c.  A $500.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $500.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. A copy of the certificate of occupancy is to be provided to the assessor's office. 
(4)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $200.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $50.00 for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the zoning officer may, at his or her discretion, inspect a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(6)  Abandoning. Any manufactured home that ceases to be occupied for more than six months and no active attempt to rent via regular advertisement effort or no longer complies with section 14-89, said manufactured home will be considered abandoned. Any abandoned manufactured home that ceases to be occupied by an individual(s) that remains on the property in this condition, unless subsection (7) below applies, shall be a violation of this article. 
(7)  Converting to a storage facility. If a previous occupied manufactured home is converted from occupancy to a storage facility, section 14-89 remains applicable to the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 3, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-89. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All new manufactured homes and pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD Code: Every new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a new manufactured home pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all new manufactured homes and pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. This section shall be certified to the building inspector by a licensed and bonded electrician or by a qualified and licensed installer as certified by the State of Georgia. All cost for this certification is the responsibility of the owner of the home being installed. The county assumes no liability for this certification. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(11)  Steps and landings. Steps and landings are required for all new manufactured homes and pre-owned manufactured homes at all exterior exits/entrances. A minimum landing size of four feet × six feet of pressure treated lumber or elevated concrete is required. Landings should be established to insure stability. Landings should be installed at the same elevation, but shall be no more than six inches below the elevation of the entrance/exit. Loose and/or stacked steps are strictly prohibited. If the landing is over 30 inches from the ground study handrails and guardrails are required. 
(12)  Skirting. Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Acceptable materials include masonry, stone, fiberglass, simulated brick or stone, vinyl, or other materials for the purpose of skirting. 
(13)  Towing devices. All towing devices, wheels, axles, and bolt-on hitches must be removed (unless located in an approved and permitted mobile home park). 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 4, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-90. - Registration. 
Every person, firm, corporation, or other entity holding title to or possessing a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home which is placed or located within the jurisdiction of Toombs County shall report the location of the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home to and obtain a tax decal for the new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home from the tax commissioner of Toombs County annually no later than May 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 5, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-91. - Moving. 
When moving a previously permitted manufactured home under this article, regardless if the destination is within or outside the city, applicant shall obtain a moving permit from the city. The fee for the permit is $10.00 and shall state when and where the manufactured home is to be moved. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 6, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-92. - Authority. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered subject to the specific provisions of this article to prescribe application and site forms. The city manager is empowered to require that applicant furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purpose hereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the zoning code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 7, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-93. - Tax decal required. 
(a)  Any owner of a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home who had made application for the location of a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home and whose application meets the requirements of this article shall have or shall obtain a tax decal upon payment of required charge for the same. 
(b)  Tax decal shall be prominently display near the front door so as to provide clear visibility from an observation point of ten yards from the front entrance to the new manufactured home or pre-owned manufacture home. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 8, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-94. - Local registration requirement for installers. 
(a)  Anyone who moves, performs the set-up, or installs manufactured homes within Toombs County is required to be registered, for records purposes, with the building inspector and obtain an occupational tax certificate. 
(b)  Installers will re-register annually at the beginning of each new year. Individuals will be required, when registering, to present their state installer license, which is issued by the State of Georgia. Suspension or revocation of the license by the State of Georgia will automatically void the installer registration with Toombs County. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer will maintain the list of registered installers and keep them informed of any changes or interpretations that may affect their proper installation of a home. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 9, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-95. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of new manufactured homes and pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 11, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-96. - Penalties. 
Failure to remove a new manufactured home and pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy or maintain a certificate of occupancy or obtain a moving permit for a previously permitted new or pre-owned manufactured home shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1132, § 12, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 14-97—14-100. - Reserved. 
Chapters 15—17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; taxation, ch. 68; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; use provisions for business districts, app. A, § 80 et seq.; use provisions for industrial districts, app. A, § 90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Advertising going out of business. 
When any business advertises or gives notice to the public that it is going out of business, it shall not be granted a business license for the following year. 
(Code 1977, § 13-7) 
Sec. 18-2. - Pawnshops. 
Any pawnshop doing business within the city must comply with the requirements of this section. The pawnshop must: 
(1)  Keep a written record of all items taken on pawn, and this record shall include the following: 
a.  The item and description taken on pawn. 
b.  A serial number or identification number. 
c.  The name and address of the person putting such item up for pawn. 
(2)  Keep this record on a day-to-day basis. 
(3)  Have the record available for inspection by any police officer at the close of each business day. 
(Code 1977, § 13-8) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 18-3. - Telephone franchise fee. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "recurring local service revenues" shall mean: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services, except audio and video program transmission services, where both terminals of the private line are within the city. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(b)  Southern Bell Telephone Company, which holds a franchise contract with this city for exclusive rights to maintain and operate telephone facilities within the city, shall pay an annual occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. 
(c)  The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the tax revenues billed annually in two periods (January through June and July through December) and paying the sums accrued monthly to the city on the basis of an average determined for the last such period of operations. 
(d)  The city hereby waives any claim of concession rates on telephone services used by it. 
(Code 1977, § 13-10) 
Sec. 18-4. - Flea market; garage, stall or yard sale. 
(a)  Garage sale permit required; number of permits limited. Any person desiring to sell used merchandise or personal property of such person's own or of another person on such person's own premises or at other locations within the city, shall obtain a permit from the city for such sale. Upon request, any one family unit shall be issued a permit for a period of three days (consecutively) at no charge; however, no family unit will receive more than two free permits per year (e.g. individuals can only receive two three-day permits per year.) Any person desiring to conduct a sale of personal property after two permits have been issued to a member of such person's family unit within one calendar year shall purchase the applicable occupational tax license. 
(b)  Nonprofit organizations. Any nonprofit or charitable organization shall be issued a free yard sale, garage sale or similar sale permit on a yearly basis upon adequate proof of nonprofit or charitable status. 
(c)  Sale of new merchandise. Any person desiring to sell new merchandise on such person's own premises or at other location within the city shall be considered a "transient merchant" and shall pay the occupation tax as provided. 
(d)  Flea markets. An owner of a flea market shall be charged a business license fee of $200.00 with no extra fees for stalls. 
Note: Flea market vendors will not be required to purchase an occupational tax license. 
(e)  Display of goods. Merchandise to be displayed or stored on premises for which a license or permit is required by this article shall be stored behind closed doors between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Mo. of 9-6-2011; Mo. of 4-3-2012) 
Secs. 18-5—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE 

Sec. 18-31. - Enforcement. 
The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other city taxes. A violation of this article shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 13-26) 
Sec. 18-32. - License fees. 
(a)  There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city there is levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purpose of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  Each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this section, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving terms and financing and which, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications through a licensed agent of an insurance company for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location each year. 
(c)  There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section in the amount of $40.00 for each location within the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13-20—13-22) 
State Law reference— Authority for above license fees, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b), (d). 
Sec. 18-33. - Gross premiums tax levied on life, accident and sickness insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premiums tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-23) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 18-34. - Gross premiums tax levied on all other insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1977, § 13-24) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 18-35. - Due dates for license fees and gross premiums taxes. 
(a)  License fees imposed in section 18-32 shall be due and payable on January 10 of each year. 
(b)  The premiums taxes levied by sections 18-33 and 18-34 are due and payable on January 1 of each succeeding year. Any company not reporting and paying the premiums tax on or before March 31 of each year shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1977, § 13-25(a), (b)) 
Sec. 18-36. - Reports. 
(a)  Every insurance company doing business within the city and subject to the fees and taxes imposed in this article shall file with the city clerk, on forms prescribed by him, a report showing the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; 
(2)  The location and person in charge of each business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; 
(3)  The classes of insurance written; and 
(4)  Such other reasonable information as may be required. 
In addition, the insurance company shall furnish complete information regarding the premiums received, by class, from policies written on risks for persons residing or located within the city. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is declared to be a violation of this article for any person or his agent to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. Such report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee and premiums tax. 
(b)  The person responsible for each such insurance business location subject to a license fee under section 18-32(c) shall file with the city clerk a report, on forms prescribed by him, showing the following: 
(1)  The address of the business location; 
(2)  The classes of insurance written; 
(3)  The names of the persons writing insurance at such location; 
(4)  The names of the companies represented; and 
(5)  Such other reasonable information as may be required. 
Such report shall be made over affidavit of the person in charge of the business location. It is declared to be a violation of this article for any person or his agent to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. The report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee. 
(c)  All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential, and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the city officers responsible for administering this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-25(c)—(e)) 
Secs. 18-37—18-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 18-66. - Levy of business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions as defined. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1977, § 13-31) 
Sec. 18-67. - Due date of license tax. 
The due date of license taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1977, § 13-33) 
Secs. 18-68—18-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION TAXES, ADMINISTRATIVE AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Occupation taxes and fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but does not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(c)(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Code 1977, § 13-41) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 18-97. - Enforcement and collection of unpaid fees. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and becomes fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent taxpayer or feepayer located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the Charter and state laws. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter and state laws in regard to tax executions. 
State Law reference— Issuance of executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to such penalty as set by the city. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining the applicability or amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Code 1977, § 13-53) 
Sec. 18-98. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Code 1977, § 13-49) 
Sec. 18-99. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Code 1977, § 13-48) 
Sec. 18-100. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in appendix A to the ordinance from which this article is derived shall pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in such appendix A. 
Editor's note— Appendix A referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or the city clerk upon request. 
(Code 1977, § 13-43) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8. 
Sec. 18-101. - Date due; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. If any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Code 1977, § 13-52) 
State Law reference— Time for payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty for failure to pay, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Secs. 18-102—18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 18-131. - Levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate city limits and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Base fee (administrative fee) ..... $ 50.00 
Plus: 
Employees (each) ..... 15.00 
(2)  Maximum fee ..... 500.00 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in this state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in this state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in this state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner with locations in this state subject to an occupation tax by more than one local government in this state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate city limits. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. If a practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his occupation tax the flat fee fixed in section 18-134 shall receive no reduction in the amount of the license tax. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which is the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business' or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-44; Ord. of 11-2-2004) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6 et seq.; criteria for determining amount of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10 et seq.; tax on real estate brokers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17; proration of fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 18-132. - Public hearing. 
The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-54) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6(c). 
Sec. 18-133. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or an instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356, for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this section shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Code 1977, § 13-47) 
State Law reference— Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 18-134. - Election of method by practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this article shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 18-131 or shall pay an occupation tax of $400.00 per practitioner. At such time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Code 1977, § 13-46) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 18-135. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Code 1977, § 13-42) 
State Law reference— When administrative fee allowed, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5(6), 48-13-10(e). 
Sec. 18-136. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before December 31 of each year, an individual, a business or a practitioner subject to the occupation tax shall file with the city clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee. 
(Code 1977, § 13-50) 
Sec. 18-137. - Confidentiality of information furnished to city. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure under O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). 
(b)  Violation of the confidentiality as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be unlawful and upon conviction shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of the occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay the occupation tax. 
(d)  If a taxpayer completes one or more forms in order to comply with sections of this article imposing either an occupation tax or a regulatory fee and any such form fails to disclose the social security number or the appropriate federal or state taxpayer identification number or other identification numbers, if required by the city, such omission shall be reported in a timely manner to the state revenue commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 13-51) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 18-138. - Display of certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1977, § 13-45) 
Secs. 18-139—18-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2002, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-34. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. V, §§ 18-161—18-194. 

Sec. 18-161. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-162. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meaning indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with the capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with the capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons herein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade (five percent or more) or derives a significant or substantial portion (five percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products article or articles which are designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with specified sexual activities as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee or commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such a crime. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same rituals and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty. 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Zoning administrator means the person charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-163. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on December 25th of each year or on Sunday. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5-foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-164. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-165. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity there under if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-166. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-167. - Admission of minor unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minor within licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-168. - Sales to minor unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-169. - Location. 
(a)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurements from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-170. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications: Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a court of competent jurisdiction orders a longer time. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment: Before any person may work on a licensed premise, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information ads the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city council, which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license: Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors: For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-171. - Application and fee permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or the clerk's designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a license fee in the amount of $1,000.00, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. This permit fee shall be nonrefundable; provided, however, that $900.00 of the license fee shall be refunded if no license is issued. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-172. - Application content. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous address of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately proceeding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of corporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporations or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all applications forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders or more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in this state including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent whit the provision of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character, references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those document giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-173. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-174. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and the city council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of the state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, the applicant's employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder, 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-175. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest herein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there by a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-176. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion, and within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-177. - Same—Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided. That the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for The adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-178. - Licenses—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however; that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-179. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee in the amount of $100.00, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-180. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council decision. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-181. - Same—City council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the city council agenda, the council makes take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-182. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set thereof, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from the interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. This action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-183. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-184. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-185. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date. Such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state finding, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city administrator and chief of police. 
(b)  the city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-186. - Same—Action by city council. 
The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided by this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-187. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon. A fine not to exceed $500.00 per thereof shall punish conviction violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Every day that such violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation punishable as stated above. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-188. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining as adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-189. - Revocation and appeal. 
The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, he shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(1)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
a.  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
b.  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
c.  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
d.  An applicant has violated any provision of this article; 
e.  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the State of Georgia or the City of Lyons regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
f.  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation or business license or tax, fine or other amount of money due to the City of Lyons under this article or any other taxing ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(2)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the appeal hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (3) below. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
(3)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, the city before the mayor and city council shall schedule a hearing within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be in the form of a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Toombs County filed within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-190. - Business or occupation tax. 
The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax shall be the amount stipulated in the business occupation tax provisions of the City of Lyons Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-191. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-192. - Self-inspection. 
The licensee of a licensed premise or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premise shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premise. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-193. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing the licensing officer shall serve of the licensee, by personal service of him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 18-194. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 02;1, § 1, 11-5-2002) 
Secs. 18-195—18-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; TRANSIENT PEDDLERS AND LOCAL PEDDLERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-3, adopted Dec. 2, 2003, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VI, §§ 18-195—18-203. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 18-216—18-224. 

Sec. 18-216. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meaning set forth below, unless the use of any such term in context clearly indicates otherwise. 
License : the right or privilege granted by the city to engage in business as a transient merchant or peddler within the city. Evidence that such right or privilege has been granted shall be in the form of a license document issued by the city clerk, which document shall be kept at the merchant's place of business within the city or on the peddlers' person or within the peddler's vehicle. 
Street : As defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1, which includes any street, alley, lane avenue, court, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other public place in the city. 
Local peddler : A local peddler is any person who is a resident of the city, who has no regular fixed place of business within the city, and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services by going from place to place within the city, except a person selling agricultural products and holding a letter from a county agent certifying that the products were produced by that person. 
Transient merchant : Any person, whether resident or nonresident of the city, who has no permanent, regular place of business within the city, and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services from a temporary fixed place of business located within the city, such temporary place of business to include any room or space in a hotel or motel, boarding house, public or private building, or any other fixed place of business within the city; provided however, that no merchant shall be considered a transient merchant under this article if: 
(1)  Such merchant is a bona fide commercial traveler selling goods at wholesale by samples; 
(2)  Such merchant has already paid a license to the city for the privilege of conducting a permanent business; or 
(3)  Such merchant is a peddler otherwise licensed by the city to sell goods from place to place. 
Transient peddler : Any person, who is a nonresident of the city, who has no permanent, regular place of business within the city, who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods or services by going from place to place within the city, except a person selling agricultural products and holding a letter from a county agent certifying that the products were produced by that person. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-217. - License or permit—Required. 
Before any person shall engage in any of the pursuits defined in section 18-216, such person shall obtain a permit or license as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-218. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Application for a license or permit shall be made at city hall and shall provide such information as is required by this article, and such additional information as made be necessary to define completely the activities to be conducted within the city. 
(b)  An application containing the following information shall be completed and filed with the city clerk by each applicant for a license to do business within as a transient merchant or as a transient peddler: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  Local address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(4)  Applicant's date of birth and age, if an individual; 
(5)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name and home address of each partner, principal, or corporate officer; 
(6)  Applicant's social security number, or federal employer identification number; 
(7)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(8)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name, home address, date of birth, age, and social security number of the principal representative in the city; 
(9)  Name and home address of all employees to work in the city; 
(10)  Name of business represented by the applicant, if different from applicant; 
(11)  Permanent address of the business represented by the applicant; 
(12)  Name of agent conducting sale, if any; 
(13)  Local address and telephone number of sales agent, if any; 
(14)  Type of merchandise or service to be offered for sale; 
(15)  Place where business is to be conducted; 
(16)  Dates to be in business, and total number of days to be in business; 
(17)  Hours during which business will be conducted; 
(18)  Manner in which business is to be conducted; 
(19)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(20)  Georgia state business license number, if required; 
(21)  State and license tag number of each vehicle to be used in businesses; 
(22)  List of cities where business has been conducted by the applicant within the past 12 months; 
(c)  The applicant shall sign the license application under oath. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-219. - Same—Mayor approval required. 
Any application for a transient merchant's license or a transient peddler's license shall be reviewed by the mayor, or his designee, to insure compliance with zoning and safety code requirements of the city. The application shall be approved by the mayor or by the mayor's designated representative, before a license may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-220. - Same—Basis for disapproval or revocation. 
No application shall be approved and any license previously issued may be revoked if an investigation determines that: 
(1)  Any false statement, untrue or misleading information, or material omission if Contained in or left out of the application; 
(2)  The applicant, or any principal participant in the business, has been convicted within the past five years of a felony, or of any crime involving moral turpitude, whether in connection with operation of the business or not; or 
(3)  Such business is operated, or is proposed to be operated, in violation of any law of the United States or the state, or in violation of any ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-221. - License and permit fees; expiration. 
(a)  Transient merchant. A license fee of $200.00 per year shall be paid by any transient merchant; provided, however, that in any case where a higher license fee is required by ordinance, the higher fee shall apply; and provided further that any such license shall expire not later than December 31 of the year in which business is conducted. 
(b)  Transient peddler. A license fee of $200.00 per year shall be paid by any transient peddler; provided, however, that in any case where a license fee higher than the $200.00 limit is required by ordinance, the higher fee shall apply; and provided further that any such license shall expire not later than December 31 of the year in which business is conducted. 
(c)  Local peddler. Any local peddler shall be licensed in the same manner and in the same amount as is required of any other local merchant, as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-222. - Issuance of license or permit. 
After all provisions of this article have been met by an applicant for a transient merchant's license or peddler's license, the city clerk shall be authorized to issue a license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-223. - Registered agent of transient merchant or peddler. 
(a)  Required. Any transient merchant or peddler shall submit evidence with his license application showing that transient merchant has filed with the clerk of superior court of the county the name and permanent address of the transient merchant's or peddler's registered agent. Such registered agent shall be a resident of the county and shall be an agent of such transient merchant or peddler upon whom any process, notice, or demand required by law to be served upon the transient merchant or peddler may be served in the same manner provided by law for the service of a summons or complaint. Such registered agent shall agree in writing to act as such agent and a copy of the agreement shall be filed with the license application. Any such registered agent shall act in the same capacity and have the same duties and responsibilities, and be subject to the same actions of the superior court, as would any agent registered as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-46-5 through § 43-46-7. 
(b)  Exceptions. No applicant which is a corporation, and which submits evidence that the corporation is chartered by this state, shall be required to secure a registered agent within the county. No applicant which is a corporation chartered outside the state and which submits evidence that the corporation is currently registered with the secretary of state of this state shall be required to secure a registered agent within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Sec. 18-224. - Compliance; penalty for violation. 
Any person doing business within the city as a transient merchant, transient peddler, local peddler, solicitor, or in any other manner covered by this article who violates any provision of this article, or any merchant, peddler, or solicitor who makes any false statement in any application for a business license or permit, shall be subject to revocation of any license or permit according to procedures established by ordinance, and shall be subject to subpoena to municipal court under a misdemeanor charge, and punishment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, 12-2-2003) 
Secs. 18-225—18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BONA FIDE COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 

Sec. 18-241. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Lyons Bona Fide Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-242. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-243. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-244. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the state. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skee-Ball &reg; machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Trivia machines; 
(19)  Laser games; 
(20)  Simulator games; 
(21)  Virtual reality machines; 
(22)  Maze games; 
(23)  Racing games; 
(24)  Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
(25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin operated vending machines; 
(8)  Coin operated scales; 
(9)  Coin operated gumball machines; 
(10)  Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-245. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license, without first having paid the applicable occupation tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-246. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the license with a copy of this article. The city shall require a fee of $120.00 per machine for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-247. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paid the required occupational tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-248. - Minimum distance requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(b)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol as set out in section 18-248 of this Code. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served at such location. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-249. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-250. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the Class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)  Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the clerk of the city. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Lottery Corporation. 
(c)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than 50 percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the Class B machines are situated from such Class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-251. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-252. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-253. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke the city-issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
b.  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
c.  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
d.  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
e.  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
f.  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than 12 months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed the amount allowed under the city charter. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-254. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months, or any combination of these penalties. 
(b)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a public hearing as described in section 18-253 of this article. 
(c)  Offering one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-255. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machines: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-256. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited . All bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
e.  Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-257. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-258. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01072014, § 1, 1-7-2014) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 18-270. - Definitions. 
Hours of operation shall mean the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. each day of operation. 
Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is peddled, vended, sold or given away. 
Permitted locations. Mobile food vending units are allowed to operate on improved private property only within the following specific location: 
(1)  Private property in the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 
(2)  On property owned or leased by the city and the food is served during an event that is sanctioned and/or approved by the city. 
The city marshal or zoning officials will verify all proposed locations for vendor units that meet the standards for the city's zoning ordinances. 
Signage shall mean any type of design or artwork that advertises the use of a mobile food vending unit or which contains the name of a mobile food vending unit. 
Permitted signage shall mean any signage marketing and/or advertising any mobile vending unit that meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Sandwich board signage located on the premises where the mobile food vending unit is located while the mobile food vending unit is operating. 
(2)  Wall signage that is safely affixed to the mobile food vending unit so as to be flat against the surface of that mobile food vending unit. 
Prohibited signage shall mean any signage of any type that is erected or maintained on a right-of-way owned or maintained by the city, by Toombs County, or by the state; and any and all signage located off the premises where the mobile food vending unit is operating. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-271. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  The person or business entity owning or operating a mobile food vending unit shall not operate a mobile food vending unit within the city limits at any permitted location unless and until such person or business entity has obtained a permit from the city. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a city permit, the person or business entity applying for a permit under this article must show compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each mobile food vending unit which will be engaged in the selling of cooked or prepared food must be licensed by the state health department. A copy of the license of each mobile food vending unit to be operated within the city limits must be submitted with the permit application. 
(2)  Each mobile food vending unit that will be operated within the city limits must have a current inspection by the health department which must be conspicuously posted on the mobile food vending unit. A copy of the current inspection of each mobile food vending unit to be operated within the city limits must be submitted with the permit application. 
(c)  That a mobile food vending unit is licensed by the health department does not guarantee that the city will issue it a permit or that the city will approve the mobile food vending unit for any permitted locations. 
(d)  All permit applications submitted under this article must be reviewed and approved by the following departments of the city: 
(1)  The permit department which will verify that all state licensing requirements have been satisfied and that the application is complete; 
(2)  The planning and zoning department which will review the application to insure that the location and district standard requirements are met; 
(3)  The police department which will review the application to verify if any existing safety violations for the applicant are pending. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-272. - Permitted location application. 
(a)  Either after receipt of a permit from the city or contemporaneously with the application for a permit, each owner of a mobile food vending unit must obtain approval for each permitted location at which it intends to operate. To obtain such approval, the owner or operator of each such mobile food vending unit to be operated in the city limits must submit an application for permitted location which requires the following information: 
(1)  The applicant shall complete and submit all information required by the application form supplied by the city. 
(2)  A copy of either the permit issued by the city or a pending application for a permit with the city. If a copy of the application is submitted, copies of all attachments must also be submitted. 
(3)  A list of all locations at which the applicant intends to operate a mobile food vending unit. 
(4)  A location plan of each permitted location at which the owner or operator of a mobile food vending unit intends to operate. That location plan must identify where the mobile food vending unit will be located. Each such plan shall be no smaller than eight and ½ inches × 11 inches. Each such plan shall illustrate the distance measured from the mobile food vending unit to the building location of the nearest established eating and drinking establishments. 
(5)  A written approval from the property owner of record for such occupancy. 
(6)  A written statement that the location contains a suitable surface and designated parking spaces for the mobile food vending unit and patrons or customers. 
(7)  A signed affidavit from the applicant that the mobile food vending unit will not transport alcoholic beverages to the permitted location and will not sell or give alcoholic beverages at the permitted location to any of its patrons or customers. 
(8)  A copy of the mobile food vending unit lability insurance naming the city, as additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-273. - Requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  Failure of an owner or operator of a mobile food vending unit to abide by the following requirements and restrictions shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(b)  Only one mobile food vending unit may be permitted per applicant. 
(c)  A mobile food vending unit shall operate only during the hours of operation. Operation of a mobile food vending unit outside of the hours of operation shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  A mobile food vending unit shall not operate at any location that is considered to be a permitted location unless and until that mobile food vending unit is approved to be operated at that location by the city. To be approved for any permitted location, each mobile food vending unit must submit an application on forms provided by the city. 
(e)  Any mobile food vending unit which begins operating at a permitted location without securing all permits shall be in violation of this article. 
(f)  A mobile food vending unit shall not arrive to operate at a permitted location more than 30 minutes prior to the time it intends to begin to operate or prior to 6:30 a.m., whichever is later. 
(g)  A mobile food vending unit shall not stay at a permitted location more than 30 minutes after it is finished operating or later than 10:30 p.m. on any day, whichever is earlier, unless permitted under section 18-271 by the city. 
(h)  Any semi-permanent structure used and/or associated with the mobile food vending unit operation shall also be removed from the site during hours of non-operation. 
(i)  A mobile food vending unit shall use only permitted signage and shall not use any prohibited signage. 
(j)  All electricity to the mobile food vending unit shall be from a generator or a main power supply via a portable cord that is in conformance with the National Electrical Code. 
(k)  A drive through shall not be used at any mobile food vending unit. 
(l)  A person operating a mobile food vending unit shall not conduct business with or accept orders from any patrons or customers when such patrons or customers are in their motor vehicles. 
(m)  The area within which a mobile food vending unit is operating shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubbish and debris. To that end, each mobile food vending unit must provide a trash or garbage receptacle in which patrons or customers may place their litter or garbage. The receptacle shall be within ten feet of the mobile food vending unit. The operator of the mobile food vending unit must remove this litter or garbage receptacle and any loose litter or garbage from the permitted location when he or she leaves the permitted location. 
(n)  A mobile food vending unit shall not use amplified music of any type. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of a vehicle operated solely as an ice cream truck and which does not sell any other type of food. 
(o)  A mobile food vending unit shall not use temporary or portable lighting outside of that necessary to illuminate the inside of the unit and the servicing area of the unit. 
(p)  All of the following shall be posted on each mobile food vending unit in a conspicuous place: 
(1)  The current business tax receipt; 
(2)  A list of the locations at which the mobile food vending unit is permitted to operate; 
(3)  A copy of the permit issued by the city. 
(q)  A mobile food vending unit operating at or participating in any event sponsored, authorized, or approved by the city shall pay the registration fees set forth or required by the city or event coordinators. Such fees, if applicable, shall be paid prior to the event. The mobile food vending unit will abide by any and all requirements set forth by the event. 
(r)  A person who operates a mobile food vending unit shall not go into a park owned or operated by the city, the county or the United States of America to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the person's activity is authorized by a rental agreement or written permission of the director of the parks and recreation department of the city. 
(s)  Parking requirements and restrictions: 
(1)  Owners and operators of mobile food vending units shall secure a minimum of two dedicated parking spaces for customers utilizing their services. 
(2)  Parking spaces shall be marked as required by zoning regulations. 
(3)  Parking spaces shall meet the size requirements established by the city. 
(4)  Owners and operators of mobile food vending units shall not sell to customers in areas designated as public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-274. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced through the city's code enforcement procedures or as otherwise authorized in this Code and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. the remedies that the city may pursue for a violation include, but are not limited to: 
(l)  Any violation of this article may be punishable as provided for in section 1-7; 
(2)  Revocation of the permit of the owner or operator of the mobile food vending unit found in violation of this article; 
(3)  Refusal of the city to renew the permit of the owner or operator of the mobile food vending unit found in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Secs. 18-275—18-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOWING AND STORAGE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 18-300. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public highway means every public street, road, highway, or thoroughfare of any kind within the territorial jurisdiction of the city. 
Secure impoundment lot means a fenced enclosure within which impounded vehicles shall be stored pending recovery by the legal owner, or other disposition in the manner provided by law. All requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city shall apply to impoundment lots; provided, fencing shall be designed so as to prevent unauthorized entry and removal of vehicles without the operator's consent. 
Towing and storage business means any person holding a permit issued pursuant to applicable Georgia law and/or issued pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Safety, and any other applicable agency, commission or department of the State of Georgia, to engage in the business of towing abandoned, disabled, and wrecked vehicles or otherwise rendering assistance to disabled or wrecked vehicles, including the impoundment and storage thereof, for profit. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-301. - Conduct of business. 
No person shall operate a towing and storage business (hereinafter sometimes referred in this article to as "business") within the city without holding a license issued by the city and paying the requisite licensing fees for the current calendar year. Such license shall be in addition to the registration of the business with the Georgia Department of Public Safety, and any other applicable agency, commission or department of the State of Georgia, and such business shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Safety, and any other applicable agency, commission or department of the State of Georgia, and with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and any other federal agency, department or commission. It shall be the duty of any person who is licensed under this article to remove a motor vehicle from public property at the request of a law enforcement officer, or to remove a motor vehicle from private property at the request of the property owner, in strict compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-11-2 and 44-13-1, as applicable and as amended. Further, any wrecker or tow truck driver and personnel shall report to the law enforcement officer in charge when such driver and personnel arrives at the scene of any accident or wreck in the city, and such driver and personnel shall wear a reflective safety vest at all times while at the scene of any accident or wreck in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-302. - Licensing of businesses. 
Each applicant for a license to operate a towing and storage business within the city shall make an application to the city manager, or his or her designee, and receive a license before engaging in such business. Applications shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the tender of an annual licensing fee in the amount as set out in the schedule of fees and charges as determined by the city; provided, however, for licenses issued after July 1 of any year, the fee shall be one-half the annual fee. Licenses shall not be assignable, transferable or prorated. All licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year; renewal applications by existing licensees shall be filed on or before December 1 of the current year. License fees paid under this section are regulatory and shall be assessed in addition to the payment of occupation taxes of the business. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-303. - Qualifications for license. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license under this article shall present to the city manager, or his or her designee, a current certificate of registration from the Georgia Department of Public Safety, and any other applicable agency, commission or department of the State of Georgia, together with a certificate of insurance showing full compliance with all comprehensive liability, property damage and garage insurance requirements (including, but not limited to, coverage for stored vehicles and contents thereof) of the Georgia Department of Public Safety, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, and any other applicable agency, commission or department of the State of Georgia or federal government. The applicant shall designate on the application the complete name, address and telephone number(s) of each and every owner of the business, indicating therein its form of business organization. The applicant shall provide a true and correct copies of the motor vehicle registration for each wrecker or tow truck operated in connection with the business, a current, three-year certified driver's history from the Georgia Department of Drivers Services, or similar agency of another state, for each and every driver who will operate a wrecker or tow truck in connection with the business, and a valid driver's license for the appropriate class and with appropriate endorsements required for the operation of the business's wreckers and tow trucks, as required by Georgia and/or federal law, for each and every person who will drive a wrecker or tow truck in connection with the business. Also, each and every owner of the business, and driver for the business, shall sign a release authorizing the Lyons Police Department to conduct a criminal background check on any such owner or driver. Where the business is to be conducted by other than a sole proprietor, the applicant shall register with the city an agent for service (individual), a street address (no post office box), and at least one valid telephone number where the agent shall be contacted on a 24-hour basis, and the business shall keep all such information current. Any applicant denied a license shall be given written notice, via personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at such address as furnished to the city, by the city manager or his or her designee, of the reason for denial and shall be notified, via personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date, time and location of the right to an informal hearing conducted by the city manager, affording the applicant fair opportunity to be heard. Upon the city manager's finding by a preponderance of evidence that cause exists for denial of the applicant's application, the city manager may deny such application in writing and provide the finding to applicant, via certified mail, return receipt requested, and applicant may thereafter file an appeal as provided by law. 
(b)  To qualify for a license under this article, the towing and storage business shall have a place of business either within the corporate boundaries of the Lyons, Georgia or within the unincorporated area of Toombs County, Georgia, at which location there shall also be a secure impoundment lot where vehicles shall be impounded. Prior to the issuance of any license, the secure impoundment lot shall be inspected by the city manager, or his or her designee, to ensure that all requirements of the secure impoundment lot have been met, including fencing of a minimum of six feet in height, which is equipped with an operational lock, effective security measures, and adequate lighting. Any such inspection, and a written report thereof, shall be filed with the city manager, or his or her designee, within five business days of the acceptance of an application. All applicants, owners and drivers of the business shall be of good character, as evidenced by having no conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application, and to determine such good character or lack thereof, such applicants, owners and drivers shall submit to fingerprinting at the Lyons Police Department at the time of applying for the license, and at any time there is a change in ownership of the business or when any new driver is employed by the business. The city manager and his or her designee shall also be authorized to inspect the location of any business to ensure compliance with this article, upon reasonable notice to the owner of the business. 
(c)  Upon issuance, the license shall be prominently posted within the licensee's place of business and the licensee's name and license number shall be painted or displayed on each wrecker or tow truck used within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-304. - Revocation of license. 
It shall be the duty of all licensees to report promptly to the city manager, or his or her designee, any loss of qualification for a license or any change of condition which renders the licensee ineligible to engage in the operation of towing and storage lot business. Any violation of the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2, as amended, shall be grounds for revocation. Upon written notice by the city manager, or his or her designee, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee or its registered agent for service, at such address as furnished to the city, stating the grounds for revocation, the city manager shall conduct an informal hearing, affording the licensee fair opportunity to be heard. Upon the city manager's finding by a preponderance of evidence that cause exists for revocation of licensee's license, the city manager may revoke in writing the license for the remainder of its stated term and provide the revocation to licensee, via certified mail, return receipt requested, and the licensee shall immediately cease operation of its towing and storage business within the city, and the licensee may thereafter file an appeal as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-305. - Fees for licensees. 
(a)  The maximum reasonable costs of removal, relocation, and storage pursuant to this article shall be compensatory, as such term is used in the public utility rate-making procedures, and shall be established and maintained annually by the mayor and council, by resolution, on or before January 1. No person licensed under this article to operate a towing and storage business within the city shall impose, assess or collect rates, fees and charges prohibited by this article or this state. No fees shall be allowed for the removal and storage of any motor vehicle towed or stored in violation of O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13, as amended, or O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2, as amended. 
(b)  On or before November 1 of each year, any person holding a license issued under this article may file with the city manager, or his or her designee, a proposed schedule of revised rates and charges allowed by this article. Notice of the filing shall be published once a week for two weeks in "The Advance," advertising the date, time, and location of a public hearing to be held before the mayor and council. At the hearing, any affected citizen may be heard as to the proposed rate revisions. After concluding the hearing, the mayor and council shall act upon the rate request. Copies of the current rate schedule shall be posted conspicuously in each licensee's place of business and in a conspicuous location within city hall. 
(c)  Where a proposed rate increase is contested, the mayor and council shall have the right to require licensees to submit financial statements, tax returns, and such other information as is needed to justify or deny the rate proposal. To the extent allowed by law, any and all officers, employees and contractors of the city, and the mayor and council, shall treat such data as confidential and proprietary information. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-306. - Private trespass towing; signs in commercial areas. 
Within the city, any person entitled to the possession of any parcel or space of private real property shall have the right to cause to be removed from the property any motor vehicle or trespassing personal property found thereon; provided, however, a person entitled to the possession of an off-street parking area or vacant lot within a commercially zoned classification under the city's zoning ordinance shall have the right to remove a vehicle or trespassing personal property parked thereon after the regular activity on such property is concluded for the day only if there is conspicuously posted in the area of each driveway or other ways providing access to the off-street parking area, the location of which must be approved by the Lyons Police Department, that any vehicle or trespassing personal property parked thereon which is not authorized to be in such area may be removed at the expense of the owner along with information as to where the vehicle or trespassing personal property may be recovered, the cost of such recovery, and information regarding the form of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 18-307. - City rotation list. 
Every licensee under this article shall be eligible to serve on a rotation list maintained by the Lyons Police Department to provide towing and storage of motor vehicles from public property. There is hereby delegated to the chief of police of the Lyons Police Department the duty to promulgate reasonable rules governing licensees serving on the rotation list. Any licensee may opt out of serving on the rotation list by giving written notice to the chief of police. Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, when any law enforcement agency is involved in a matter concerning any abandoned, disabled or wrecked vehicle within the city and contacts 911 personnel about the towing of any such abandoned, disabled or wrecked vehicle, a licensee shall have at least 30 minutes to respond to such matter, beginning when such licensee is first contacted by 911 personnel about such matter. 
(Ord. No. 1322A, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Chapters 19—21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-21 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Responsibility for removing dirt. 
Funeral directors shall be responsible for removing dirt from the cemetery accumulated by vault emplacement. 
(Code 1977, § 6-1) 
Chapters 23—25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1264, § I, adopted December 4, 2017, repealed ch. 26, §§ 26-26—26-28, 26-56—26-63, 26-90—26-100 and enacted a new ch. 26 set out herein. Former ch. 26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977; Ord. No. 03042014, adopted March 4, 2014 and an Ordinance adopted March 3, 2015. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and construction, ch. 14; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-1. - Definition. 
A nuisance is anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1, as amended. 
Sec. 26-2. - Enumeration of nuisances. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of a reasonable person residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in anyone hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any fire and safety regulations of this Code or Georgia law. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish and trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys another. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery and equipment. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more, except in licensed junkyards. The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-3. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
The city manager shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, as well as the following additional powers: 
(1)  To appoint and fix the duties of all officers, agents and employees of the city, as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(2)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers, agents and employees, as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-4. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-5. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist in the city which constitutes an immediate or grave danger to public health and safety which requires immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following any applicable abatement process or procedure required in this Code. Further, notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, the mayor and city council shall be authorized to summarily and without the notice abate any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-6. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the owner or other responsible person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the city manager, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement of this article, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-7. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 26-6 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his or her order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever actions deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, as amended. 
Sec. 26-8. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 26-6 and 26-7, and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 26-6 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in-rem, and the execution shall issue in-rem. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-9. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his or her order. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-10. - Criminal penalties. 
In addition to any civil penalties which may be imposed on any violator of this article, the violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment under section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-11. - Collection of cost from the owner or parties in interest. 
(a)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on any lien created pursuant to this article by paying to the city within one calendar year after perfection of the lien, the total amount due, together with interest at the rate of ten percent per annum. the city council shall be authorized to grant an extension of an additional one year for the payment of such lien to prevent hardship on the citizens of the city, with any unpaid balance during such extension to accrue interest at the rate of ten percent per annum. 
(b)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of such one-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(c)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such one-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-12. - Right of entry of city manager. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division or article, the city manager, or his or her designee, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises or structures within the city. However, the city manager, or his or her designee, is required to seek permission from the owner, authorized agent, or tenant to gain entry onto private property. If permission is not given, the city manager, or his or her designee, must seek an administrative search warrant from the municipal judge or seek other remedies that may be available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-13. - Remedies. 
The city's remedies as provided for in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person or entity from the obligation to comply with any other part of this Code, or to permit the maintenance by any person or entity of a nuisance. Any condition found to be in violation of this division may be abated in the manner provided for by this division, unless this Code specifically sets forth other applicable abatement procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-14. - Severability clause. 
A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or part of this chapter or article shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining parts of this chapter or article. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-15—26-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 26-36. - Certain weeds, grasses, and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this division. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this division. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall apply to property located within subdivisions of record in the city, as may be more particularly described on plats of survey recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Toombs County, Georgia, and to city lots, as may be more particularly described on the official plat or map of the city in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Toombs County, Georgia. The provisions of this division shall not apply to undeveloped areas of un-subdivided land within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-37. - Height permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-38. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For any violation of this division, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-39. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 26-38, the city is authorized to have a contractor enter the property, and the contractor is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit a bill of costs to the city. The city shall inspect the work, and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill of costs for payment and forward it to the city clerk for payment. 
(b)  The city clerk shall promptly send the owner of the property a written statement of account demanding full payment of the bill of costs within 30 days of such statement. 
(c)  If statement of account under subsection (b) of this section is not made, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time, place and date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property for amount in the statement of account. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this division, that the notice required in section 26-38 was given, that the work was performed, that the city paid the bill of cost, and that the city was not reimbursed for paying the bill of costs, execution shall issue for the amount of the statement of account and shall be executed by the city clerk in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; in lieu thereof, a notice shall be published once a week for consecutive four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern;" shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; shall provide a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation, and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time, place and date named in the notice why execution should not issue in-rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply, but the execution shall issue against the property in-rem. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-40. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this division are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code or other laws or regulations of the city, or to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-41—26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 26-61. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-62. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-63. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 26-62 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the city manager and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the city manager. 
(4)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(5)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(6)  Proper disposal by remediation, removal or destruction of any collections of water that are specified in section 26-62. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-64. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the city manager shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-65. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, within three days after due notice has been given, then the city manager shall be authorized to do so, and all necessary or appropriate costs incurred by the city manager for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-66. - Right of entry of city manager. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the city manager may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-67—26-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 26-88. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer; repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle and vehicle mean motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1, as amended. 
Sec. 26-89. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-90. - Removal required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner thereof if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days written notice, the police department of the city shall remove or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained for such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-91. - Notice to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the Georgia Department of Revenue and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2, as amended. 
Sec. 26-92. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Except as provided in this division, the open storage of inoperable or unclaimed operable vehicles on private property is prohibited. 
(b)  Any person lawfully engaged in the repair of damaged or inoperable vehicles may store such vehicles on private property for a period not to exceed 60 days. Thereafter, any such vehicles shall be screened from view by a fence or shrubbery on all sides of the property on which the vehicles are stored. 
(c)  Any person lawfully engaged in the operation of a junkyard or salvage yard in accordance with this Code, including but not limited to zoning ordinances, shall ensure that such yards are screened from view on all sides of the property upon which the vehicles are stored. Persons determined to be in violation of this provision shall have a period of six months from the date of finding the violation to install screening as required in this subsection. 
(d)  A vehicle lacking a current, valid state tag shall be presumed to be inoperable for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-93. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the city is a nuisance. 
(b)  The owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot in the city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location outside of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-94—26-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-115. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "Blighted Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-116. - Purpose. 
The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, the governing authority of the city of Lyons, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII (d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-117. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Blighted property, blighted, or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the Georgia law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., as amended, or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires a remedial investigation or feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal laws or codes for at least one year after written notice of the legal or code violation to its owner; and 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdictional general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-118. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the city, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-119. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated by ordinance; or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this division for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this division, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of the county, as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(5)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the municipal judge. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal judge and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(6)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the city clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearing shall be published as a legal advertisement in "The Advance," or other designated legal organ in Toombs County, Georgia, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(7)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this division. The municipal judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the municipal judge shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the county tax commissioner, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(8)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the municipal court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the county superior court, for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-120. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this division as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to division 6 of this chapter. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed in compliance applicable codes in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the county tax commissioner. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with any applicable minimum statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this division) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-121. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in this division, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the city or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-122. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the county tax commissioner, in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and by tax map and parcel number, as assigned by the county tax assessor. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-123—26-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DERELICT PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-144. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-145. - Purpose. 
The governing authority of the city, finds and declares that, in the city, there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with general nuisance law, or the applicable state minimum standard codes, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance where such properties are located, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state and the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. Further, the governing authority finds and declares that in the city there is in existence conditions or uses of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state and the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the governing authority of any municipality of this state finds that there exist in such municipality dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, power is conferred upon such municipality to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in the applicable manner provided in O.C.G.A. Title 41, Chapter 2. 
The governing authority of the city hereby adopts into this division provisions consistent with those in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, as amended, including the method and procedure, to be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. As permitted by Georgia law, the governing authority of the city further declares that a finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-146. - Definitions. 
(a) Specific terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
Applicable codes means (A) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (B) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 2; and (C) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, Article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this division, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council of the city of Lyons, Georgia. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Interested party means: 
Owner; 
Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Municipality means the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government of the city, county or state relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city or county. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 or any agent of such officer or officers, and the city manager, or his or her proper designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(b)  Definitions incorporated by reference. To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8, as amended, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-147. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city which (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of the applicable ordinance or ordinances in force in the city; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; or (vii) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. Moreover, any property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity thereof is illegal and in violation of this division, and a finding by any governmental health department, health officer or public officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that such property is in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-148. - Duty of owners of property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with the applicable ordinance or ordinance in force in the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-149. - Powers of public officer or his or her agent or designee. 
(a)  The public officer, or his or her agent or designee, shall be authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this division, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him or her by the city charter and any other ordinance of the city, including but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this division. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal judge for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this division; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this division to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this division, the city manager or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal judge before issuing a complaint in-rem as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-150. - Determination of derelict property; proceeding in municipal court; procedure after court finds property derelict; lien; other powers; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in, on or at such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such building, dwelling, or structure is illegal and shall be abated by repair or demolition in accordance with this division. In making his or her determination, the public officer may be guided by the existence of one or more of following conditions, though the existence of such conditions shall not limit his discretion to consider other similar conditions: 
(1)  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(4)  The building, dwelling or structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(5)  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building, dwelling or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings. 
(6)  If for any reason the building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(7)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse. 
(8)  The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of the city or Georgia law. 
(9)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, uncleanliness, structural defects, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or any defects to any building, structure or dwelling or portion thereof increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities. 
(b)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in the commission of drug crimes, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that the dwelling, building, structure or property is vacant, dilapidated and being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed 
(c)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in-rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with the applicable ordinance or ordinances; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the municipal court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable ordinance or ordinances relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable ordinance or ordinances relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; provided that, no person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained from the city and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street, and the person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level, and fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry, and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the public officer. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable ordinance or ordinances relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. Further, the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, or the city tax collector or revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (f) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Toombs County, Georgia, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 26-151. The clerk of the county superior court, shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(h)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this division shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-478 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this division in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city in connection with the lien collected. 
(i)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this division may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this division. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this division. 
(j)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this division shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this division together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, or municipal tax collector or revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(k)  The governing authority of the city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(l)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(m)  In addition to the procedures and remedies in this division, a governing authority of the city may provide by ordinance that designated public officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in-rem as provided in this division. 
(n)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-151. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Toombs County, Georgia, once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this division on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(e)  The public officer may cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-152. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this division or chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the State of Georgia or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this division and chapter shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-153. - Right to enter and inspect. 
The public officer, or designee, or any person authorized to enforce this division or chapter, and any sworn officer of the city's police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-154. - Code of Georgia. 
Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-155. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this division to protect the public health, life, safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 26-156—26-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 26-177. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "Noise Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-178. - Definitions. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation or company, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-179. - Purpose. 
This division is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, through the control of sound or noise. It is the intent of this division to establish standards that will reduce excessive community sound or noise, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-180. - Sound or noise measurement standards for law or ordinance enforcement personnel. 
For the purposes of this division, "plainly audible" means the sound emanating from any sound-producing source, as set forth below, which can be heard from the distances set forth below, using the following sound measurement standards: measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance of no less than the required minimum distance from the sound-producing source. For music or any other sound or noise, bass reverberations are included, and words and phrases need not be discernible. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-181. - Restrictions of 600 feet from 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(a)  Mechanical sound-producing devices. It is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any radio, television, stereo, musical instrument, loud speaker, phonograph or sound amplifier, or other machine or device, to produce, reproduce or amplify sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance more than 600 feet from the sound-producing source, from 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(b)  Human produced sounds. It is unlawful for a person to yell shout, whistle or sing, or to produce or create any other sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 600 feet from the sound-producing source, from 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(c)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device, to produce, reproduce or amplify sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 600 feet from the sound-producing source, from 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(d)  Businesses near residential zoning districts. Notwithstanding the prohibitions in paragraphs (a) through (c) above, it shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or to permit to be operated, a business that produces sound, so that the sound is plainly audible within any residential zoning district at a distance of more than 600 feet from the property boundary of the person's business, from 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and from 7:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-182. - Restrictions of 300 feet from 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Friday from 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(a)  Mechanical sound-producing devices. It is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any radio, television, stereo, musical instrument, loud speaker, phonograph or sound amplifier, or other machine or device, to produce, reproduce or amplify sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 300 feet from the sound-producing source, from 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Friday from 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(b)  Human produced sounds. It is unlawful for a person to yell, shout, whistle or sing, or to produce or create any other sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 300 feet from the sound-producing source, from 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Friday from 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(c)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device, to produce, reproduce or amplify sound, so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of more than 300 feet from the sound-producing source, from 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Friday from 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(d)  Businesses near residential zoning districts. Notwithstanding the prohibitions in paragraphs (a) through (c) above, it shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or to permit to be operated, a business that produces sound, so that the sound is plainly audible within any residential zoning district at a distance of more than 300 feet from the property boundary of the person's business, from 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Friday from 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-183. - Exclusions. 
(a)  The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any sound or noise made for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or any sound of noise that is made in the performance of emergency work; 
(2)  Any sound or noise emanating from any school activity or any organized athletic activity, including but not limited to any game, match, practice and performance; 
(3)  Any sound or noise made by law enforcement personnel or a public employee in the performance of a public function or duty; 
(4)  Any sound or noise made by domestic animals, which noises or sounds are controlled by section 10-3 of this Code; 
(5)  Any sound or noise made by a burglar or vehicle alarm; 
(6)  Any sound or noise made by any church chime or bell; 
(7)  Any sound or noise emanating from any activity, concert, event, festival or performance as may be permitted by the city manager, or his or her designee; 
(8)  Any sound or noise produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical noise or sound making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound or noise is controlled by the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; 
(9)  Any sound or noise created or produced in connection with any government construction or maintenance project or any utility company construction or maintenance project; and 
(10)  Any sound or noise created or produced by any railroad, air or mass public transportation vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-184. - Other restrictions regarding gasoline-powered landscape maintenance devices, equipment, and machines. 
Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, it is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any gasoline-powered landscape maintenance device, equipment and machine, including but not limited to a leaf blower, lawn mower, chain saw, edger, hedger or weed-eater, within a residential zoning district or at a location within 600 feet of a residential zoning district, from 8:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m., except that, within an agricultural zoning district, no person shall use or operate, or permit to be used to be used or operated, any such device, equipment or machine within 600 feet of a residential dwelling from 9:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-185. - Construction noise. 
Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, it is unlawful for a person to use or operate, or to permit to be used or operated, any device, machine or equipment, including but not limited to an earth mover, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, which produces sound that is plainly audible within a residential zoning district from a distance of more than 300 feet from the property boundary of the person who is operating such device, machine or equipment from 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-186. - Request for temporary relief or stay. 
(a)  Any person requesting temporary relief or stay from the enforcement of this chapter shall file a written request for a special administrative permit for a period not to exceed 30 days, and such person shall do so by filing the request with the city clerk for consideration by the city manager. The city manager has the discretion to grant or deny the permit (with such conditions as may be warranted), if strict enforcement of this division will result in exceptional and undue hardship to the applicant. The request for the permit shall be on a form as prescribed by the city manager, and at a minimum, the form shall include: 1) any negative impact that a denial of the request would have on the applicant's project or activity, 2) any positive and negative impact that the a grant of the request would have on the owners of surrounding and nearby properties, 3) all steps taken by the applicant to notify and explain the project or activity to the owners of surrounding and nearby property, 4) all steps that have been and will be taken to minimize any negative impact of the project or activity on the owners of surrounding and nearby property, and 5) all possible risks to public safety and health. 
(b)  Any permit may be revoked by the city manager, and the city manager may withhold the issuance of future permits if: 1) there is any violation of any condition of the permit, 2) there is any material misrepresentation of any fact in the request for the permit, or 3) if there is any material change in any circumstance relied upon by the city manager in granting the permit. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, no special administrative permit shall be authorized to delete, modify or change in any way any requirement imposed as a condition of zoning or as a condition of a special or conditional land use imposed by the city council. 
(d)  Appeals from any decision concerning a special administrative permit shall be made to the city council, by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days the city manager's decision regarding any special administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 26-187. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The city may prosecute violations of the division by issuance of a citation, and in such cases, the penalty for a violation shall be as set forth in section 1-7 of this Code. With respect to a violation of any provision of this division that is continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. With respect to a violation of any provision of this division that is not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties set forth in section 1-7, or in lieu thereof, the municipal court may issue an order requiring the immediate abatement of any sound found to be in violation of this division. 
(c)  No provision of this division shall be construed so as to impair any other equitable or legal remedy that any person may have for any injury or damage arising out of a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § I, 12-4-2017) 
Chapters 27—29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 14, 2015, amended ch. 30 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as set out herein. The former ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 10-1—10-3 of the 1977 Code. 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; fire protection fee, § 74-58. 
State Law reference— Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-31. - Code adopted. 
The city hereby adopts, for the purposes of fire prevention, enforcement of minimum fire and life safety standards, the state minimum fire safety standards, as promulgated pursuant to the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner of the state, under authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., including all subsequent revisions thereof, a copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference as if fully set out in this section. These standards shall henceforth be the code for fire and life safety within the jurisdiction of the city and the fire chief and the local fire marshal shall apply such code in performing the duties of their offices. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(2)) 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state fire safety standards by reference, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(b). 
Sec. 30-32. - Inspections for fire hazards. 
It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the local fire marshal, as often as may be necessary, all buildings and structures within the jurisdiction of the city, except those buildings and structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 and those buildings which are owned, occupied or operated by the state. Fire safety inspections shall be routinely conducted at least annually in all commercial and industrial buildings and all structures occupied by a business licensed by the city pursuant to this Code. Private residences shall only be inspected upon the fire chief or local fire marshal first having probable cause to inspect for violations of the fire and life safety codes. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(2)) 
Sec. 30-33. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Written notice of violation; contents, time period for compliance. Upon inspection and discovery of a violation of the state minimum fire safety standards within any building or structure within the jurisdiction of the city, the fire chief or local fire marshal shall serve written notice of the violation upon the owner or his designated agent, and upon all tenants of the structure. Such notice may either be personally served or served by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall state that the owner shall have 20 days in which to correct or repair the violation and to bring the building or structure into compliance with code standards. Upon good cause shown, the fire chief may extend the period for compliance if the owner demonstrates, in good faith, reasonable effort to correct or repair the violation. 
(b)  Failure to correct violation; citation. If the owner fails or refuses to correct or to repair the violation within the time provided, the fire chief or local fire marshal shall cite the owner, or his designated agent, in accordance with the procedure for abatement of nuisances as set forth in this Code. 
(c)  Abatement of nuisance; failure or refusal to comply; penalty Upon hearing and determination that a nuisance exists by the judge of the municipal court, the court shall allow the owner a reasonable time within which to abate the nuisance. If the owner fails or refuses to comply with the order to abate, the court may cite the owner for contempt and impose a fine up to $200.00 for each day the owner allows the nuisance to continue unabated, order the owner to be imprisoned for up to 20 days, or both. 
(d)  Additional remedies; abatement of nuisance by city at owner's expense; notice. In addition to enforcing the fine and/or imprisonment against the owner, the city may cause the building or structure to be repaired, any hazardous materials removed, or the dangerous conditions remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the city. The city manager shall cause written notice of the amount of the expense to be mailed to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner, within 30 days after notice in writing of the amount of such expense fails, neglects, or refuses to repay the city the expense incurred, the city shall issue a fi. fa. against the owner of the property for the expense actually incurred. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(2)) 
Sec. 30-34. - Compliance with state requirements. 
(a)  Plans and specifications submitted and approved prior to issuance of building permit, etc. No building permit shall be issued or construction started on any proposed building or structure listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 until the plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved by the state fire marshal. Any existing building or structure listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(1)(b) shall be deemed a proposed building in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation, a fire or other hazard of serious consequence, or a change in the classification of occupancy. 
(b)  Posting of certificate of occupancy; enforcement of occupancy load. Every building and structure for which the state fire marshal has issued a certificate of occupancy shall post the certificate in a prominent location within the business establishment or building. The occupancy load, as established by the certificate of occupancy, shall be strictly enforced at all times by the owner and business establishment. Failure to strictly enforce the occupancy load shall be deemed an offense against the city, punishable in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2015(2)) 
Secs. 30-35—30-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 31 - RESERVED 
Chapter 32 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 3, 2010, amended ch. 32 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as herein set out. The former ch. 32, §§ 32-1—32-13, 32-31—32-34, and 32-51—32-55, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 02-03, Art. 1 (§§ A—D), Art. 2 (§§ A—H), Art. 3 (§§ A—C), Art. 4 (§§ A—E), Art. 5, and Art. 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2003. 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the mayor's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 32-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before May 15, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 15, 1986. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 15, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after May 15, 1986, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 15, 1986. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 6) 
Sec. 32-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Lyons, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 32-4. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 32-5. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 32-6. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Lyons, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 32-7. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 19, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Toombs County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 161 NE Broad Street, Lyons, Georgia 30436. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 32-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 32-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 32-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 32-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 32-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Lyons, Georgia, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 32-13. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than five days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Lyons from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 32-14—32-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 32-31. - Designation of administrator. 
The city administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 32-32. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 32-52(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 32-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 32-7, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 32-32(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 32-32(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 32-32(1)c. and 32-52(2) or section 32-54(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 32-34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city's zoning board as established by the city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator/mayor in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Toombs, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 5) 
Secs. 32-35—32-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 32-51. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 32-52. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 32-51(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 32-33(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 32-51(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 32-7 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 32-53. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 32-7 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 32-7, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 32-51(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 32-54. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 32-7 where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 32-52. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 32-55. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 32-7 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 32-51(4), "elevated buildings". 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 32-32(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 32-56. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 32-57. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(1), Art. 4, § G) 
Chapter 33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Drilling of water wells. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to drill or dig a water well, either deep or shallow, on any property within the city, provided the city has previously made available or will, upon written request, make available within a reasonable time thereafter an adequate water supply for the uses and purposes intended at the site where the supply of water is desired. 
(b)  The drilling of wells in the city limits for the purpose of heating and air conditioning only is permitted, provided that the water must be returned directly to the ground and not used for any other purpose. The applicant must appear personally before the city council and must pay an inspection fee of $15.00 upon signing a contract with the city. 
(c)  If a supply of water shall be desired at any site within the city which is not at that time furnished by the city water supply or which cannot, within a reasonable time, be provided by the city water supply, the city, acting by and through the city council, may, at its discretion, issue to the person desiring the water supply a license authorizing the drilling or digging of a water well, deep or shallow, the cost of such license to be set by the city council. However, no such license may be issued unless the application for such license shall be accompanied by a certificate from the proper city, county and state officials indicating that the water supply at the site of the contemplated well is safe for human and animal consumption and is in no way deleterious to the health, safety and welfare of any potential user or consumer of the supply of water or contiguous landowner or occupant. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city officers to inspect property within the city to discover violations of this section upon the private or public property within the city. 
(e)  This section shall be administered by the mayor, city council, police department, city engineer, building inspectors and other city law enforcement officers under the supervision of the city council. The owner or tenant in possession of any land or property shall be notified, in writing, of any violation within the city to abate such violation, nuisance and public health hazard by removing or closing such well within 15 days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to the owner or tenant at his last known address. 
(f)  A person receiving a written notice of a violation may appeal to the city council within seven days of receipt of the notice, stating therein his reasons, in writing, which may be filed with the city clerk, as to why he is unable or should not be required to comply with this section or as to why this section is not applicable to him or to the situation in question, and these issues shall be heard and tried by the city council, which shall decide the questions in issue according to the evidence submitted by the parties. 
(Code 1977, §§ 21-16—21-20) 
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Watershed protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescent wastes, or hazardous wastes are disposed of on land by placing an earth cover on thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments. 
(Code 1977, § 21-66) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-32. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 21-67) 
Sec. 34-33. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement, and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the city zoning ordinance in appendix A to this Code, as it is enacted or may, from time to time, be amended. 
(Code 1977, § 21-70) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 34-34. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within an existing agricultural or single-family residential district, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot, any portion of which lies within wellhead protection zone, shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 1977, § 21-68) 
Sec. 34-35. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 34-34: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides. 
(2)  Septic tanks or drainfields appurtenant thereto. 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways, and walks serving buildings permitted under section 34-34. 
(4)  Sanitary landfills. 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites. 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins. 
(7)  Underground storage tanks. 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Code 1977, § 21-69) 
ARTICLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-36. - Short title. 
This article shall be known, referred to, and may be cited as "The Environmental Conservation Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-37. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and policy of the city to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the city and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the city; to facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the city; and to require permits for new development or location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-38. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have meanings given in this section. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Sections 260 and 261, and as amended by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules for Hazardous Waste Management (Chapter 391-3-11). 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
Perennial river/stream means a river/stream or section of a river/stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
Protected river corridor means all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank, as existing at the time of the application of this ordinance; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or re-subdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, fiber optic lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas, including wetlands created for mitigation purposes under Section 404 of the United States Clean Water Act. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-39. - Ordinance administration. 
The city manager, or his or her proper designee, shall be [responsible] for administering this article and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-40. - Fees. 
Any fees for applications, inspections, and issuance of any permit required or issued under the provisions of this article shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of any such permit. The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by resolution of the city from time to time, and such fees shall be kept by the city clerk for inspection by the general public upon written request to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-41. - Variances. 
When due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this article, the city may, subject to applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, vary such requirements only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this article. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-42. - Violations and penalties. 
A breach of any provision, prohibition, and installation restriction of this ordinance by any person or entity shall be a violation of this article. Any person or entity that violates, neglects or refuses to comply with this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided this Code. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the city may also, at any time, use any other legal or equitable remedy available at law ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, this article. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-43. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The city may bring citations, accusations, and complaints in connection with any violation of this ordinance before the Lyons municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-44. - Legal status of provisions. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such declaration shall not affect the article as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-45. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever any provision of this article and the provision of any other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, the article requiring the highest or strictest standard shall govern. All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-46. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect and be in force on the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived is enacted and ordained by mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Secs. 34-47—34-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-76. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permit required. No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the city shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the city. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the city. 
(b)  Minimum lot size. All lots intended for residential or other use within the city shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health according to the "Rules of Georgia Department of Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems" manual for on-site sewage management systems and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in the tables MT-1 and MT-2 hereby attached to and made a part of this article as Appendix I, if on-site sewage management is utilized, and/or with the county health department determination under the manual, whichever is stricter (i.e., requires the largest lot size). 
(c)  On-site sewage management permit required. No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the city until a site approval letter or an on-site sewage management construction permit has been issued by and obtained from the county health department. 
(d)  Permit coordination. The permit under section 34-76 (a) shall not be issued until the county health department issues an on-site site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(e)  Requirements are minimum. The regulations and requirements set by this article shall be the minimum requirements. 
(f)  Compliance with state and federal laws, rules and regulations. All developments, structures, and uses within the city shall also meet the requirements of all other applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations in effect, including but not limited to state and federal department of transportation regulations, state fire marshal regulations, uniform Construction Codes, Erosion and Sedimentation Acts, and all other Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Georgia Environmental Protection Division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of any permit or approval letter under this article does not constitute certification of compliance with any applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and does not abrogate the responsibility of any applicant or person to so comply. 
(g)  Map interpretation. If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this article because of interpretation of the applicable map, the written decision of the city, or the county health department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in section 34-76 (h). 
(h)  Map appeal. Any person who disputes a decision of the city or the county health department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at his or her own expense file an a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of such decision. The appeal shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division, and the city, or the county health department, if the county health department is delegated responsibility for administering this article. Any costs for submission of evidence to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division shall be borne by the person filing the appeal. 
(i)  Coordination with zoning regulations. This article shall be coordinated with zoning regulations of the city, and if there is any conflict with the zoning regulations, the stricter provision shall apply. If zoning regulations have been adopted, the provisions of this article shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirement(s) to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Secs. 34-77—34-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WETLANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-101. - Findings of fact. 
The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-102. - Reference map. 
The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in the city and to be regulated areas under this article will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Toombs County, Georgia. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ("Corps"), and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by the Corps. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-103. - Wetlands development permit requirements. 
No activity or use besides those identified in section 34-104 shall be allowed within wetlands without a wetlands use permit issued by the city, except as otherwise set forth herein. Activities or uses permitted under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act may receive a wetlands use permit issued by the city after the applicable federal permit or federal letter of permission/determination has been obtained, as described below, and once any other applicable provisions of this article are satisfied: 
(1)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development, which is subject to permit herein, would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this article section is necessary. 
(2)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development, which is subject to permit herein, may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands which appear to be under the jurisdiction of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, the Corps jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this article. 
(3)  If the Corps jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this article will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at his or her own expense, obtains either a Section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the Corps that no federal permit is required. 
(4)  No action in the administration of this article and no wetlands use permit issued by the city shall relieve anyone from any federal or state permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-104. - Uses not requiring permit. 
The following uses are permitted, without a wetlands use permit issued by the city, on wetlands within the city to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging, other than as allowed herein, and provided they have no long term impairment for wetland function. 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities, though Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption); 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require a Section 404 permit; 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, hunting, bird watching, hiking, biking, boating, horseback riding, kayaking, and canoeing; 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification; and 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities, including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock (such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture). 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-105. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Secs. 34-106—34-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-136. - Findings of fact. 
Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank affluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents of the city relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-137. - Reference map. 
The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the city to be regulated areas under this article is the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)." 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-138. - Groundwater recharge areas development permit requirements. 
All uses, except those identified in section 34-139 and those subject to further restrictions by any underlying zoning district, are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)  All new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of US EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1, et. seq. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal and state requirements; 
(2)  All single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses, which are located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems, shall be required to have 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DPH Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this article in Appendix I), as determined by the county health department. The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the public health manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations or determination specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply; 
(3)  All lots shall have a minimum width of 150 feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located; 
(4)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other on-site sewage management system unless the county health department first approves the proposed on-site sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for on-site sewage management systems and the applicable provisions of this article; 
(5)  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins; and 
(6)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10" 7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service, or the Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-139. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities; 
(2)  New facilities handling hazardous materials regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as to require a permit; 
(3)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins; and 
(4)  All new sanitary or other landfills. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Secs. 34-140—34-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MAJOR RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-171. - Findings of fact. 
Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second are of vital importance to the State of Georgia in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-172. - District delineation. 
Protected rivers as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-2-8, includes any perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Altamaha River and the Ohoopee River through Toombs County and meet this criteria. A protected river corridor and a protective 100 foot natural vegetative buffer, as defined in Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria Chapter 391-3-16, is hereby established along the entire length of this river(s) within the jurisdiction of Toombs County. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank, if any, within the city. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a 100 foot buffer of the river bank except for certain permitted uses as set forth in section 34-173. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-173. - Permitted uses. 
No development, or construction, or other land disturbing activity shall occur within the 100 foot buffer from the protected river except for the following permitted uses, as long as they do not impair the long term functions of the protected river or the protected river corridor. In addition, the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction within the river corridor in connection with the following permitted uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the county health department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drain field is located outside of the 100 foot buffer area; 
(2)  Any residential use existing or under construction prior to the date of the adoption of this article; provided that, such use has an on-site sewage management construction permit issued by the county health department prior to the date of adoption of this article; 
(3)  Any industrial or commercial use existing prior to the date of the adoption of this article; provided that, such use does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meets all other federal and state environmental rules and regulations; 
(4)  Road and utility crossings, and utility locations if no other location is reasonable, providing the construction of these crossings and uses meet the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any other state or local requirements, if stricter, protect the integrity of the buffer area to the extent reasonably possible, and are located as far from the river bank as is reasonably possible; 
(5)  Timber production and harvesting; provided that, it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended; 
(6)  Agricultural production and management; provided that, it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission or its successor, and all other state and federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended; 
(7)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, as amended; 
(8)  Natural water quality treatment or purification; 
(9)  Wastewater treatment; and 
(10)  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 34-174. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes; 
(2)  Hazardous or solid waste landfills; 
(3)  Septic tank drain fields within the 100-foot buffer area under any circumstance; and 
(4)  Septic tanks within the 100-foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings which are permitted under section 34-173. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Secs. 34-175—34-200. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX I. - MINIMUM LOT SIZING FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 
1.  Minimum lot size requirements for these lots utilizing on-site management systems are as follows for single family dwellings including but not limited to: manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local ordinance, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 as follows. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-1 
Minimum (Min) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System. 
Type of Water Supply System 

 
*In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system, 
** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
2.  Minimum lot sizing requirements for those lots utilizing on-site sewage management systems are as follows in Table MT-2 for multi-family residential dwellings, all other non-single family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile home parks. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in Sections A-F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-2 
Minimum (Min.) Lot Sizes, Minimum Lot Widths and Maximum (Max.) Allowable Sewage Flow for the Type of Water Supply System, 
Type of Water Supply System 

 
*In this context "Non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad= gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Chapters 35—37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt ordinances for the purpose of preserving public health, safety and welfare, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Drinking in public. 
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage in streets, alleys, parks, motor vehicles, or any public place or place where the public is invited, except such places as are licensed to pour alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1977, § 14-10) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 38-2. - Possession of marijuana. 
Any person convicted in the municipal court of possession of less than one ounce of marijuana shall be fined $150.00 and/or confined in jail for 60 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6) 
State Law reference— Drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court over marijuana cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
Secs. 38-3—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 38-31. - Turkey shoots. 
Turkey shoots are prohibited within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3) 
Sec. 38-32. - Loitering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found within any public or private building, after being requested by the owner or person in charge thereof to leave. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5) 
Secs. 38-33—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 38-61. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Scope of violation. Any person who shall use loud, boisterous or obscene language or who shall fight, quarrel or make any unnecessary noise or do any other thing or act within the corporate city limits calculated to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the city or of any person within the city limits shall be guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Defense to charge. It shall be a full defense to any charge under this section that the offense charged was committed in the reasonable defense of person, family, habitation or property against unprovoked or unlawful attack, assault or trespass; but for a mutual consent to fight, both persons shall be guilty of the offense. 
(c)  Fine for disorderly fighting. The fine for disorderly fighting is $200.00 for the first offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9) 
Sec. 38-62. - Congregating to obstruct streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the streets or sidewalks or for a number of persons to congregate in such numbers on the city sidewalks or streets so as to obstruct the sidewalks or streets. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Obstructing highways, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33. 
Sec. 38-63. - Hunting inside city limits. 
No hunting or discharging of firearms shall be allowed within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11) 
Sec. 38-64. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place or in view of the public wearing pants or shorts below the waist, which exposes the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Any person violating the provision of this section shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $250.00 and be ordered to perform not less than 20 hours or more than 80 hours of community service. 
(Mo. of 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 38-65—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC HEALTH 

Sec. 38-81. - Use of tobacco products on city property prohibited. 
(a)  Unlawful use of tobacco products. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any form of tobacco, including, but not limited to cigarettes, E-cigarettes, cigars, tobacco pipes, chewing tobacco, and any form of smokeless tobacco at, in or on any indoor or outdoor facilities owned or operated by the City of Lyons, including, but not limited to all public buildings, city-owned vehicles and equipment, real property, parking lots, restrooms, parks, athletic fields, and walking/hiking trails leased, owned or maintained by the city. 
(b)  Signage. The city shall cause appropriate signs to be posted sufficient to inform the public and all city employees of the prohibition on the use of tobacco products as set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  Enforcement. City staff[,] city police and code enforcement officers shall make periodic inspection of all city property and facilities to monitor for compliance with this section of the Code. 
(1)  Employees of the city that knowingly use tobacco products in violation of this section shall be subject to disciplinary action. Repeated violations of this section by employees of the city may result in disciplinary action, including, but not limited to written reprimand, suspension from employment without pay, or dismissal for cause. 
(2)  Any other person(s) found in violation of the prohibition on the use of tobacco products set forth in this section shall be entitled to one verbal warning by a city police or code enforcement officer a staff member of the city prior to enforcement of this section by issuance of a citation by a law enforcement officer[,] city police or code enforcement officer. 
(3)  The minimum fine for the first conviction of violating this section within 12 months shall be $50.00. Subsequent violations within the same 12-month period by the same individual shall double for each violation up to a maximum of $800.00. 
(4)  The city recommends the Georgia Tobacco Quit Line (1-800-270-7867), a toll free resource operated by the Georgia Cancer Coalition, for those members of the public and employees of the city that are attempting to quit tobacco use. More information is available at www.georgiacancer.org/prev-quitline.php. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2014) 
Chapters 39—41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited in city parks and buildings, § 10-7; environment, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 42-26. - Curfew. 
There shall be a curfew on all city parks from 11:00 p.m. until daybreak. Any unauthorized person found therein during such hours shall be fined $35.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7) 
Sec. 42-27. - Young children accompanied by older person. 
Children under six years of age must be accompanied by a person 13 years of age or older while in all city parks. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8) 
Sec. 42-28. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverages, liquors, wines or other intoxicating spirits in any park owned or maintained by or on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Any person seeking admittance to the parks shall submit to a search of his person and vehicle by any officer of the police department in order to prevent the transportation of any alcoholic beverages, liquors, wines, or other intoxicating spirits into the parks. Any person refusing to allow his person or vehicle to be searched shall be refused admittance to the parks. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined up to $100.00 and/or confined in jail for seven days and not allowed to use the park facilities for a period not to exceed six months. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8.1) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Secs. 42-29—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted April 1, 1994 set out provisions intended for use as Art. III, §§ 42-30—42-40. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§42-41—42-51. 

Sec. 42-41. - Creation; purpose. 
The mayor and city council hereby determine that the power to provide, establish, conduct, and maintain a recreation system for the city shall be vested in and exercised by a recreation board, hereafter called "recreation board", and the same is hereby established. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-42. - Membership. 
The recreation board shall consist of six members. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-43. - Appointment; terms of members. 
The term of office of the members of the recreation board shall be for three years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that for and at the pleasure of the mayor and city council, any member of said board may be dismissed from office and a new member appointed to fill his unexpired term, and except that the terms of such board members shall be that two members' terms shall expire each year hereafter. Members whose terms expire in any given year shall be eligible for reappointment. The membership of the board shall annually submit to the mayor and council the name or names of prospective members for appointment. The mayor and council reserve the power to approve or reject such nominations and fill vacancies of unexpired terms. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-44. - Organization. 
The recreation board shall meet at least once a month. Immediately after January 1 or each year, the members shall meet and organize by electing one of their members as chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-45. - Adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations. 
The recreation board shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs and for the proper conduct of recreation in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-46. - Control; regulation of activities and facilities. 
The recreation board shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities now owned or controlled by the city. It shall have power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people, in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-47. - Appointment of director of recreation; other personnel. 
The recreation board shall have the power to appoint and designate a person to act as director of recreation, who is trained and properly qualified for the work, and the power to appoint such other personnel as the recreation board deems proper, subject to approval by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-48. - Submission; approval of budget. 
Annually the recreation board shall submit a budget to the mayor and council for its approval. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-49. - Soliciting; receiving gifts and bequests. 
The recreation board may solicit or receive gifts or bequests of money or other personal or real property or any donation to be applied either principal or income or both, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-50. - Reports required. 
The recreation board or the director of recreation shall make an annual report to the mayor and council, and shall make such other reports as from time to time may be requested of it by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Sec. 42-51. - Application; effect of state law. 
This article is adopted under the provisions of the Act of Legislature approved February 1, 1946 appearing in Georgia Law 1946, page 152 et seq., and the recreation board herein created shall have all powers and duties provided in that act. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1994) 
Chapters 43—45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1263, § 2, adopted December 4, 2017, repealed ch. 46, §§ 46-1—46-4, 46-31—46-36 and appendix A and enacted a new ch. 46 as set out herein. Former ch. 46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

ARTICLE I. - CITY RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 46-1. - Establishment of plan to provide retirement and benefits for employees. 
O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40 provides that, by ordinance, the governing authority of the city is empowered to establish a plan or plans for the provision of retirement or employee benefits for its employees and that the ordinance shall set forth the employees to be covered, the benefits to be provided, and the conditions of the plan. Pursuant to a duly approved ordinance on August 5, 2014, the city has restated, confirmed and enacted the retirement plan for the employees of the city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the adoption agreement, any addendum to the adoption agreement, the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System (GMEBS) Master Plan Document, and the GMEBS Trust Agreement, and the foregoing documents and instruments have been approved by authorized officers of the city and GMEBS, such that the foregoing shall constitute a contract between the city and GMEBS, all as authorized and provided by O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1263, § 2, 12-4-2017) 
Sec. 46-2. - Fixing of rights and obligations of former employees and officers. 
Except as otherwise specifically required by law or by the terms of the master plan or adoption agreement (or any addendum), the rights and obligations under the plan with respect to persons whose employment with the city was terminated or who vacated his or her office with the city for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this ordinance are fixed and shall be governed by such plan, if any, as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 1263, § 2, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 46-3—46-30. - Reserved. 
Chapters 47—49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 34; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Planning and zoning authority, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Altamaha-Georgia Southern Area Planning and Development Commission. 
There is hereby adopted the ordinance to establish the Altamaha-Georgia Southern Area Planning and Development Commission, which ordinance is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1977, § 17-5) 
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 50-31. - Created. 
The city planning commission hereby created. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be city residents, appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2) 
Sec. 50-33. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(b)  The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be a city officer or employee. 
(c)  The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be a public record. 
(d)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(e)  The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3) 
Sec. 50-34. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, such planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 358). 
(Code 1977, § 17-4) 
Chapters 51—53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Signs used by retail distilled spirits dealers, signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising near state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Outdoor advertising signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain any outdoor advertising sign which: 
(1)  Outdoor advertising signs may be erected in the commercial and industrial districts of the city. All structures will be composed of metal and steel construction. The maximum area of any outdoor advertising sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in sign area. Such area not to include as part of the measurement the structural components or trim of such sign. No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected to exceed 30 feet above grade of highway. If additional height is needed a conditional use permit may be issued. No outdoor advertising sign shall exceed 50 feet in length and the bottom coping of sign shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level. 
(2)  Contains more than one face visible from the same direction on the main traveled way. Back-to-back, and V-type constructed signs shall, for the purpose of determining compliance with size and spacing limitation, be considered as one sign. 
(3)  Is within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest scenic area, cemetery, church or historic landmark. 
(4)  All outdoor advertising signs permitted to be erected under this chapter shall not be erected after the passage of this chapter unless the sign to be erected is spaced a minimum of 1,500 feet from a then existing outdoor advertising sign on either side of the road as measured along a parallel to such road. This spacing does not include back-to-back, or V-type sign structures, as such sign structures are considered one sign structure for spacing requirements. Side-by-side signs are not allowed. No signs shall be stacked one above the other. No sign shall be erected or maintained within 20 feet of the nearest edge of any right-of-way or public utility easement. This distance shall be measured from the nearest outer edge of the sign. 
(5)  All illuminated outdoor advertising signs shall be so illuminated so as to adhere to the customary practices of the industry in the state at the time of passage of this chapter, providing that no light device shall be used which in any way initiates any traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, or highway directional sign, or law enforcement of emergency vehicle lights, or in any manner flashing lights to a residential zone, or in any way creates a traffic hazard. 
(6)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected or maintained which is in an area not zoned for commercial or industrial activity and within 300 feet in any direction from a residence without the written consent of such residential property owner. 
(7)  No person shall engage within the corporate limits of the city in the business of erecting or maintaining outdoor advertising signs as required under this chapter until after such persons shall have filed with the city clerk evidence of liability insurance coverage of $50,000.00 property damage, $100,000.00 personal injury to any one person and $200,000.00 for personal injury growing out of any one occurrence. Such liability insurance will save and keep the city, and all of its officials, employees and agents, harmless from all damages, liabilities, losses or judgments resulting by reason of the erection or maintenance of any such sign, and of any injury to persons or damages to property resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 17.5-21; Ord. of 1-5-1999) 
Chapters 55—57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; natural resources, ch. 34; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Multijurisdictional solid waste management resolution adopted. 
The resolution regarding the county multijurisdictional solid waste management plan, performed under the county board of commissioners, is hereby adopted by reference. At least one copy thereof is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1) 
State Law reference— Local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-31. - Dumping at landfill by residents only. 
There shall be no dumping at the city sanitary landfill other than by city residents. 
(Code 1977, § 18-2) 
Sec. 58-32. - Garbage pickup fees. 
The garbage pickup fees shall be as prescribed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 18-3) 
Sec. 58-33. - Placement of trash receptacles by businesses. 
Receptacles for trash shall be placed at the back entrance of business houses. 
(Code 1977, § 18-4) 
Sec. 58-34. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, dispose of, or burn any carcass of any dead animal, such as dogs, hogs, cows, mules, or of other description, within the city upon any private property, street, alley, lane, lot or other property except at the city sanitary landfill, unless such burning is personally supervised by the chief of police or a member of the police department. 
(b)  Any animal described in subsection (a) of this section that is taken, hauled or carried to the city sanitary landfill shall be buried not less than four feet deep in the ground, and the grave or hole in which such animal is buried must be covered level with the ground with earth, sand or cement. The sanitary landfill shall be the only place in which any dead animal may be taken, carried or dumped. 
(Code 1977, § 18-5) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 58-35. - Fee for debris removal from city right-of-ways. 
Effective January 1, 2005, a fee of $1.50 per month will be assessed every household and business within the city. The purpose of this fee is to help defray the cost of maintaining the city's rights-of-way and the inert landfill in a neat, orderly and sanitary manner. The fee will be included in the monthly water bill as designated as a tipping fee. 
(Res. of 12-7-2004) 
Editor's note— A resolution of Dec. 7, 2004, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included herein as § 58-35. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 74. 
Chapters 59—61 - RESERVED 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-12(11); buildings and construction, ch. 14; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 26; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; congregating to obstruct streets, § 38-62; parks and recreation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 70-4; towing of vehicles parked in alleys, § 70-32; one-way streets and alleys, § 70-65; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Placing obstructions on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any mobile sign, wrecker, lumber, merchandise or other obstruction on any streets or sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-1) 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 62-2. - Street openings. 
No street shall be opened which has not been deeded to the city prior to beginning any work. 
(Code 1977, § 19-2) 
Secs. 62-3—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Parades and processions generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7, 40-6-76; authority to regulate parades and processions preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, demonstration, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or other public place. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-32. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Secs. 62-33—62-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 62-61. - Required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, without a parade permit issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-62. - Application. 
(a)  A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the city clerk on forms provided by such officer. Such application shall be filed not less than seven days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals, and description of the vehicles. 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade. 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(13)  Any additional information which the city clerk shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  The city clerk, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any such application which is filed less than seven days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-63. - Issuance standards. 
The city clerk shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to: 
a.  Cause injury to persons or property; 
b.  Provoke disorderly conduct; or 
c.  Create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-64. - Notice of denial. 
If the city clerk disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-65. - Alternate permit. 
The city clerk, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the city clerk, file a written notice of acceptance with the city clerk. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-66. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles. 
(7)  Such other information as the city clerk shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-67. - Revocation. 
The city clerk shall have the authority, after a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade permit upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-68. - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1) 
Chapters 63—65 - RESERVED 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-12(12); buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 66-1. - Regulations adopted by reference. 
The subdivision regulations as submitted by the planning commission are hereby adopted. At least one copy thereof is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Mo. of 11-4-1969) 
Chapter 67 - RESERVED 
Chapter 68 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 7, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 20, §§ 20-31—20-41. To conform to the alphabetical arrangement of chapters, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch 68, §§ 68-31—68-41. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 68-1—68-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LODGING TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Lodging tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50. 

Sec. 68-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Due date. From the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hold. Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. "Hotel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, place of detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator. Any person operation a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, license or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or co-operative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any king or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax. The tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-31) 
Sec. 68-32. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after January 1, 2005, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-32) 
Sec. 68-33. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident or upon state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-33) 
Sec. 68-34. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
(a)  Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city, as provided in section 68-31 and renting guest rooms in this city, not exempted under section 68-33 shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(b)  Such operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant to whom the tax is charged, showing the amount of rent and the amount of all taxes by category. 
(c)  All taxes due shall be collected at the same time as rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-34) 
Sec. 68-35. - Registration of operator, form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the city clerk or the clerk's designee of the city, on a form provided by the city clerk or the clerk's designee. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his/her place of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city clerk or the clerk's designee may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by as association or partnership, by a member or partner, in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall, after such registration, issue without a charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-35) 
Sec. 68-36. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk or the clerk's designee monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 68-31. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk or the clerk's designee showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk or the clerk's designee. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-36) 
Sec. 68-37. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk or the clerk's designee is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the clerk or clerk's designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the possession of the clerk or clerk's designee or that may come into such person's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction, thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Service of notice of determination. The city clerk or the clerk's designee or designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the city clerk or the clerk's designee. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should least expire. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-37) 
Sec. 68-38. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk or the clerk's designee. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 68-37. 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-38) 
Sec. 68-39. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of city official. The city clerk or the clerk's designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc., form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other permanent papers in such form as the city clerk or the clerk's designee may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or the clerk's designee or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk or the clerk's designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk or the clerk's designee may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk or the clerk's designee when required by the city clerk or the clerk's designee and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk or the clerk's designee may require. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-39) 
Sec. 68-40. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk or the clerk's may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out such business or quits the business, the successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk or the clerk's designee showing that payment has been made or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be with held by such purchaser to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount or any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the city clerk or the clerk's designee. If the operator or person determines that the operator or person has over paid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk or the clerk's designee, the operator or person will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk or clerk's designee, the excess amount it was paid, or such person's administrator or executors. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-40) 
Sec. 68-41. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any data required by the city clerk or the clerk's designee or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2004, § 20-41) 
Sec. 68-42. - Tax expenditure. 
Taxes collected shall be disbursed as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4.6)(A). 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005) 
Chapter 69 - RESERVED 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, ch. 32; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 and definitions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, §§ 20-1—20-3; Ord. No. 1322B, § I, 8-7-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372 et seq. 
Sec. 70-2. - Off-road vehicles. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "off-road vehicle" means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. It includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure-tire vehicles, two-wheeled vehicles, amphibious machines, ground-effect or air-cushion vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind. However, such term shall exclude the following: 
(1)  Any motorboat; 
(2)  Any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicle; 
(3)  Any vehicles used exclusively on airports; 
(4)  All farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, clearing of land for planting, utility, service and maintenance, and earth moving, construction, or mining; and 
(5)  Self-propelled lawn mowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
(b)  Operating instructions. Any person operating an off-road vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and subject to the penalties provided in subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  Without operative brakes or without mufflers or other silencing equipment; 
(2)  On any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent; or 
(3)  On any city street, highway, or alley. 
(c)  Enforcement and penalties. All law enforcement officers shall enforce this section within the city. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $25.00. 
(Code 1977, § 20-12; Ord. No. 1322B, § I, 8-7-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-7-3, 40-7-6; authority to adopt rules consistent with state law for off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5. 
Sec. 70-3. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on the sidewalk on any city street. 
(Code 1977, § 20-9; Ord. No. 1322B, § I, 8-7-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1322B, § I, adopted August 7, 2018, repealed § 70-3 and renumbered § 70-4 as § 70-3. Former § 70-3 pertained to licensing of wreckers and derived from the Code of 1977 and an ordinance adopted August 7, 2007. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Bicycles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 
Secs. 70-4—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street automobile parking, app. A, § 62; off-street loading and unloading, app. A, § 65. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Payment of fine for illegal parking. 
The fine for illegal parking if paid out of court and within the time prescribed shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1977, § 20-4) 
Sec. 70-32. - Towing of vehicles parked in alleys. 
The police department is authorized to have vehicles towed away when left in alleys. 
(Code 1977, § 20-6) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 70-33. - Parking of vehicles on city property prohibited. 
The parking of vehicles on any city property, including sidewalks, alleys or rights-of-way, is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 20-13) 
Sec. 70-34. - Parking of semitrucks. 
(a)  The parking of semitrucks on city streets is prohibited. 
(b)  The parking of more than one semicab on private property in any residential area is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 20-14) 
Sec. 70-35. - Overnight and hazardous parking prohibited. 
Overnight and hazardous parking on all streets within the corporate city limits is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 20-10) 
Secs. 70-36—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 70-61. - Traffic signs, signals, devices and markings ratified. 
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
Sec. 70-62. - Speed limits on state routes. 
(a)  On-system highways. Speed limits for on-system highways shall be as follows: 

 
Signs to be erected by the department of transportation for all state routes. 
(b)  Off-system highways. Speed limits for off-system highways shall be as follows: 

 
(Code 1977, § 20-5) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 70-63. - Speed limits on other streets and roads. 
The following speed zones are established: 
South Washington Street from Stuart Avenue to U.S. 1 South, 20 mph. 
(Code 1977, § 20-5.1) 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 70-64. - Four-way stop intersections. 
The following intersections shall be four-way stop intersections: 
North Lanier and Oglethorpe Avenue. 
South Jefferson and West Gordon Avenue. 
(Code 1977, § 20-7) 
State Law reference— Stop signs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-72; authority to designate stop intersections preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(6). 
Sec. 70-65. - One-way streets and alleys. 
The following streets and alleys shall be limited to one-way traffic as indicated: 
McNutt Lane, being the alley located from South Jefferson Street to South Tenth Street, shall be one way east. 
(Code 1977, § 20-8) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-47. 
Sec. 70-66. - No parking areas designated. 
The following areas shall be designated with a posted sign as no parking areas: 
Highway 292 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. at Lyons Senior High School. 
(Code 1977, § 20-10.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Secs. 70-67—70-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOW SPEED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 70-81. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Lyons Low Speed Motor Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-82. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Drivers license means any license to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of the State of Georgia or any other state. 
Low speed motor vehicle (LSMV) means those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly called "golf carts" which when operated, are incapable of being operated at speeds in excess of 20 miles per hour and have at least three or more wheels. Low speed motor vehicle shall also mean any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 CFR 571.500 and in effect January 1, 2001. 
Operator means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
Owner means a person, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in or lien by another person but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as a security except as otherwise specifically provided in this title. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Street means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-83. - License required. 
Those persons who are 15 years of age, but not yet 16 years of age may drive a LSMV on the streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic of the city provided he or she has in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-4, as may be amended, and has not had his or her instructional permit suspended or revoked, and if he or she is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-84. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  All operators of LSMVs shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic in the city. 
(b)  LSMVs shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  LSMVs may be operated over those streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights, tail lights, and brake lights. 
(d)  LSMVs shall not be operated two or more abreast in a single traffic lane. 
(e)  LSMVs shall be operated only on any highway or streets where the posted speed limit does not exceed 35 miles per hour. The operator of an LSMV shall not operate such vehicle on any street or highway where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour, as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-362 except state highways (1, 280, 152 and 292). LSMV may cross state highways perpendicular. 
(f)  The operator driving LSMVs shall not engage in hazardous activities on the highway or streets and those areas accessible by the public for vehicular traffic. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of LSMV in any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of highway or streets and public access, for vehicular traffic, except for special events approved by the city. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also apply to operators of LSMVs. 
(h)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the LSMV. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the LSMV. 
(i)  Before any LSMV may be operated upon city streets or public areas of the city, it shall have installed thereon: 
(1)  An emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall be in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at the height of three feet to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(2)  An amber strobe light as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. The light must be functional at all times the vehicle is in operation, and shall be visible within 500 feet from the front and rear of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-85. - Exemption. 
The provision of section 70-84 entitled "operating regulations" shall not apply to private streets or cart paths in subdivisions designed as golf course communities if such exemption is requested by the developer of such community or a homeowners association in writing and approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-86. - All-terrain vehicle. 
All-terrain vehicles shall not be operated on any street or highway, sidewalk within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 70-87. - Penalties. 
Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 40 and this article. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Chapters 71—73 - RESERVED 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and construction, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; fee for debris removal on city rights-of-way, § 58-35; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies and of city utilities; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to: 
(1)  Damage, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, liner, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to any public utility company doing business within the city limits or belonging to the city utility systems, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, water, sewer, telephone, cable television, or other public services; 
(2)  Prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; 
(3)  In any way interfere with the proper action of such company or city; 
(4)  Divert any services of such company or the city; or 
(5)  Otherwise use or cause to be used, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such company or the city. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section or proof that a person knowingly received the benefit of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of any act made unlawful by this section shall be punished in accordance with O.C.G.A Section 16-7-25(d). 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Secs. 74-2—74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and operation of water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide for the development, storage treatment, purification, and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-26. - Access to premises by authorized agents; extension of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized city agents shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1977, § 21-37; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-27. - Application for service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service in person, at the city hall and at the same time make a cash security deposit of $100.00 for water and sewer service. 
(Code 1977, § 21-32; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-28. - Connection fees. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the city water and sewer shall pay a connection fee of $250.00 times the number of connections desired for water service and $200.00 times the number of connections desired for sewer service. 
(Code 1977, § 21-33; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-29. - Change of occupancy. 
No less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1977, § 21-38; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-30. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves the rights to discontinue its services without notice for the following: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  The consumer's willful disregard of the city's rule. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of the water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1977, § 21-40; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Secs. 74-31—74-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 74-56. - Rates generally. 
(a)  There is here by adopted water and sewer rate schedules for the city as prescribed by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The rate schedules referenced in subsection (a) of this section contemplate a single user, such as a one-family, one farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one commercial operation. 
(Code 1977, § 21-31; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-57. - Minimum charge. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedules adopted by section 74-56, shall be made fro such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1977, § 21-34; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-58. - Fire protection fee. 
A fee of $1.00 per month shall be imposed on all residential property serviced with water by the city for the purpose of fire protection, and a fee of $2.00 per month shall be imposed on all commercial property serviced with water by the city for the purpose of fire protection. The fee assessed shall be imposed and reflected on each water statement. 
A fee scheduled shall be imposed on all residential and commercial properties serviced with water by the city for the purpose of fire protection. The fee assessed shall be imposed and reflect on each water statement. The fee schedule is as follows: 

 
(Code 1977, § 21-42; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2); Ord. of 12-6-2016) 
Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, ch. 30. 
Sec. 74-59. - Swimming pool filling fee. 
A fee as prescribed by the city council from time to time shall be charged for filling a swimming pool in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21-11; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-60. - Water rates for housing authority. 
The water rates fro the housing authority shall be as prescribed by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 21-12; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-61. - Billing procedures; penalty for nonpayment; disconnection and reconnection charges. 
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  A disconnect for service will be initiated on the regular business day following the 25 th of each month if a water bill has an outstanding balance. 
(3)  Water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalty and delinquent account fee charges, have been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water and sewer system, a delinquent account fee charge of $100.00 and any outstanding fees shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the city hall, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the customer from payment of the bill. 
(Code 1977, § 21-39; Res. of 11-2-2004; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2); Ord. of 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 74-62. - Complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his water or sewer bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this division. The consumer may pay such bill under protest, and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(c)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or other proper data. 
(Code 1977, § 21-41; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Secs. 74-63—74-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 74-91. - City's responsibility and liability for installation of service lines and meters. 
(a)  The city shall run a water service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exist or is to be constructed and shall run immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 74-28, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for meter or larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(c)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21-35; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-92. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumers side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system, and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water supply. 
(Code 1977, § 21-36; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-93. - Reconnection of delinquent water accounts. 
Any water service having been cut off fort nonpayment will not be reconnected after regular working hours of the city, i.e., 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1977, § 21-13; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-94. - Illegally connecting or restoring water service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized city personnel, to connect water service or to restore water service after the service has been disconnected by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21-14; Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 3, 2010, amended div. 4 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as set out herein. The former div. 4, §§ 74-121—74-123, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 11-5—11-7 and § 21-15 of the 1977 Code. 

Sec. 74-95. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Commercial user or contributor means premises or a person who discharges industrial wastes which are similar to domestic wastes in nature, and do not exceed those parameters which define normal sewage except as to volume, in which case it shall be defined as an industrial user. 
Industrial user or contributor means an industry which discharges wastewaters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes, and having a BOD of 200 mg/l or greater and/or a total suspended solids of 200 mg/l or greater, or having a total discharge volume in excess of 24,000 gallons per month regardless of whether the waste concentration is less than these limits or not. 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
Residential domestic user or contributor means premises or a person who discharges wastewaters to the city or county sewers, which closely match normal sewer as to strength; and volume does not exceed 24,000 gallons per month, and further for billing purposes, is defined as a dwelling place of residence. If the volume discharged exceeds 24,000 gallons per month, it shall be defined as an industrial user. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the waste to be processed properly and to compensate the city for additional expenses incurred. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer that 24 hour concentration proposed during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 20 th edition, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. 
Storm drain, sometimes termed storm sewer, means a sewer which carries storm water and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Street means streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts, and all other public highways in the sanitary area. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile. 
Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(b)  All other words shall be construed as having the meanings defined in Glossary, Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage if undefined. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-96. - Use of public sewer required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage where public sewers are reasonably available. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
State Law reference— Dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 
Sec. 74-97. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available the provisions of section 74-96(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private disposal system other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault or cesspool for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city administrator. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information are deemed necessary by the city administrator. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application for permit is filed in an amount prescribed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city administrator. The city's authorized representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any under ground portions. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Where a building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the city may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all of the requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.), which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to that point as directed by the city administrator. 
(h)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Before any underground portions are covered, the applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made to the public sewer by an authorized representative of the city and only after inspection. 
(j)  all excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the public works director. 
(k)  The public works director shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including any landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-98. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids of gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process; to constitute a hazard to humans or animals; to create a public nuisance; or to create any hazard in receiving waters in the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Any water or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 or containing heavy concentrations of salts or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer works; or 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction in the flow of sewage or other interference to the proper operation of the sewer works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the public works director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment having adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city administrator shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows, velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewer treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The types of substances prohibited include the following: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or between zero and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 th horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administrator. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any water or wastes containing heavy metals in excess of the following: 
a.  Chromium ..... 1.0 mg/l 
b.  Lead ..... 2.0 mg/l 
c.  Tin ..... 2.0 mg/l 
d.  Copper ..... 0.5 mg/l 
e.  Nickel ..... 1.0 mg/l 
f.  Cyanide ..... 1.0 mg/l 
g.  Cadmium ..... 3.0 mg/l 
(6)  A combination of the metals in subsection (c)(5) of this section shall not exceed six mg/l in the effluent, or which when blended with the waste in the interceptor will have a combined concentration in excess of two mg/l when it reaches the treatment plant, subsection (c)(7) of this section not withstanding, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city administrator for such materials. 
(7)  Not withstanding the upper limits in subsection (c)(5) of this section, the city may require pretreatment of such waste discharges in accordance with subsection (d) of this section to the lowest practical and reasonable levels to comply with appropriate state or federal regulatory agency requirements, either for the treatment facility influent or effluent, or if otherwise found necessary to provide satisfactory and acceptable treatment of all wastewater. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city administrator as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies with jurisdiction over such discharge to receiving waters. 
(9)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0—9.0. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  unusual concentration of inert suspended solids; such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
b.  excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
c.  an unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs; or 
d.  the admission into the public sewers of any water or having: 
1.  a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 200 mg/l; 
2.  containing more than 200 mg/l of suspended solids; or 
3.  having an average daily flow greater than five percent of the average daily sewage flow to the plant. 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administrator. 
(12)  Where necessary in the opinion of the city administrator, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
a.  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 200 mg/l and the suspended solids to 200 mg/l; 
b.  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided; and 
c.  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. 
(13)  Plans and specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city administrator and in construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing. 
(14)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(d)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (c) of this section which in the judgment of the city administrator may have a deleterious act upon the sewer works, processes, equipment or receiving water; or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city administrator may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition with discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges; or 
(5)  Any or all of the above. 
(e)  If the city administrator permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administration, subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city administrator and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole. When deemed necessary, the city administrator may require additional meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. 
(i)  The manhole shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city administrator. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(j)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewer works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. 
(k)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment by the industrial concern under section 74-96. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-99. - Removal, transportation and disposition of scavenger wastes. 
(a)  The city council by resolution may require a formal permit for the discharge of scavenger wastes after submission of an application on forms supplied by the city. Scavenger wastes means putrid or offensive matter and the contents of all privies, septic tank and cesspools; and all other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds and/or industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewer system except as provided in this article. 
(b)  The discharge of the wastes in subsection (a) of this section shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant as shall be designated by the city administrator. 
(c)  Scavenger wastes shall be admitted into the sewer system only by resolution of the city council and subject to payment of fees or charges fixed by resolution. The fee or charge shall be based upon the full capacity of each scavenger vehicle for each discharge. 
(d)  The applicant shall be the owner of the vehicle discharging the wastes. Any false, misleading or untruthful statements as to the nature of the material shall be cause for rejection of any further discharge from the applicant. 
(e)  Discharges may also be suspended or terminated at any time by the city for willful, continued or persistent violation of this article. 
(f)  All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps and hoses used in the collection and/or transportation of scavenger wastes, shall be modern equipment in good repair. When more than one vehicle is used by the applicant, each vehicle shall bear an identifying number. 
(g)  All applicants for a permit shall furnish the following information with each applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Volume of scavenger waste fro each numbered vehicle; and 
(3)  Number of scavenger vehicles in collection service. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-100. - Powers and authority of inspectors; testing. 
(a)  The city administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city administrator or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Subsection (a) of this section, the city administrator or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging or sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 74-98. 
(c)  The city administrator and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewer works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(d)  At the order of the city administrator, all persons discharging wastewater into the city sewer system shall have their discharge tested by a city-approved independent testing laboratory quarterly at the person's expense. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-101. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 74-100 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for its satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damager occasioned the city by reason of the violation. 
(d)  Any person/company which discharges waste into the city's waste system that results in the city being unable to meet EPD's permitted discharge limits shall be responsible and accountable for all fees and/or fines levied against the city. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-102. - Grievances and arbitration. 
(a)  Upon formal request by the sewer user; the city council may hear any required arbitration of differences or grievances between the sewer user and the city administrator on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If deemed appropriate by the city council, a temporary independent hearing board may be appointed for arbitration purposes. The board shall consist of at least three persons one of whom shall be a lawyer, and the other two shall have a technical knowledge of the provisions of this article. The cost of arbitration shall be equally divided between the city and the sewer user. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-103. - Billing and service disconnection. 
Sewer charges shall be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Sec. 74-104. - Sewer rates; surcharges; tap fees. 
The sewer rates, surcharges and tap fees for treatment and collection of sewage by the city shall be in an amount prescribed in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010(2)) 
Chapters 75—77 - RESERVED 
Chapter 78 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 

Sec. 78-1. - Insurance. 
All taxicabs and U-drive vehicles must have property damage and liability insurance in some respectable insurance company for $5,000.00 property damage, $10,000.00 personal injuries. Until such insurance is provided, no license shall be issued or continued in force. 
(Code 1977, § 22-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Numbering of taxicab. 
All taxicabs operating in the city shall have a numbered sticker on the taxi. The number shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1977, § 22-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Lettering on taxicab. 
All taxicabs operated in the city shall carry a marking, with the word "taxi" and the company name, in letters not smaller than four inches. 
(Code 1977, § 22-3) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in April 1969. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets 
Cross reference— Any ordinance pertain to zoning, including but not limited to the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-12(14); sales of beer and wine near church or school, § 6-197; buildings and construction, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; flood damage prevention, ch. 32; natural resources, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 

[Sec. 10. - Authority; purposes; enactment.] 
In pursuance of the authority conferred by the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended [now repealed], and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of Lyons; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; protecting property against blight and depreciation; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and other buildings and structures throughout the municipality, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the city council of Lyons, Georgia, does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 

[Sec. 20. - Citing.] 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lyons, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THE ORDINANCE 

[Sec. 30. - Enumeration.] 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance certain words or terms are defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
The word "lot" includes the word "lot" or "parcel." 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, or arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
The word "map" or "zoning map" refers to the "Zoning Districts Map" of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Accessory use or building: A use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Boarding or rooming house: Any dwelling in which three or more persons either individually or as families are housed for hire with or without meals. 
Buffer strip, planted: A strip of land along a property line reserved for screening purposes from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way and planted with trees and/or shrubs in such a manner as to provide such screening. 
Building: Any structure attached to the ground and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Business sign: An attached or freestanding structure on which is announced the business use of the premises and/or the name of the operator of the business. 
Centerline of street: The centerline of a street is the line surveyed and monumented by the governing body as such or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the streets. 
Dwelling: A building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families. 
Dwelling unit: A dwelling or portion thereof providing permanent living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Front yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the sidelines of the lot. 
House trailer or mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling, over 32 feet long and over eight feet wide, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation for yearround occupancy. Such dwelling can consist of one or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; or it can consist of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by this ordinance. 
Lot width: The distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the front building line. 
Major street: A street designated as a major street on the zoning districts map of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
Outdoor advertising sign: An attached or freestanding structure conveying some information, knowledge or idea to the public. 
Secondary street: A street or highway designated as a secondary street on the zoning districts map of the City of Lyons, Georgia. 
Side yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the side of the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something located on the ground. 
Trailer park: A lot, portion or parcel of land designed for or which is intended to be used commercially for accommodation of two or more residential trailers. 
(Ord. of 4-3-1984) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

[Sec. 40. - Purposes of article.] 
This article is established to provide districts for the various uses of land within the city and to provide for the interpretation of district boundaries on the zoning map. 
Sec. 41. - Zoning districts. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the City of Lyons, Georgia, is divided into seven districts designated as follows: 

 
Sec. 42. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Districts Map—Lyons, Georgia," dated and certified by the city clerk. Said map is hereby made part of this ordinance; it shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and available for public inspection. 
Sec. 43. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries portrayed on the zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. 
Sec. 44. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(44.1)  Where district boundaries are depicted as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, centerlines of streams or drainageways, street lines or highway rights-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(44.2)  Where district boundaries are so depicted that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(44.3)  Where district boundaries are so depicted that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(44.4)  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divided a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

[Sec. 50. - Purpose of article.] 
This article is established to provide the conditions that must be met by anyone under the jurisdiction of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 51. - Use. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 52. - Height and density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
(a)  Exceed the height limits; 
(b)  House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
(c)  Have narrower or smaller front or side yards than are herein required. 
Sec. 53. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirement of this ordinance is not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
Sec. 54. - Yards and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or other open space of [or] the off-street parking or loading space required adjacent to any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of the ordinance shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading space required for another building. 
Sec. 55. - One principal building on a lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
Sec. 56. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

[Sec. 60. - Purpose of article.] 
This article is established to regulate nonconforming uses, off-street parking, and off-street loading and unloading; to strive for the ultimate termination of nonconforming uses; and to provide suitable off-street parking, loading and unloading space for each type of use. 
Sec. 61. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
(a)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(b)  Reestablished after discontinuance for one year; or 
(c)  Extended except in conformity with this ordinance. 
Sec. 62. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Off-street automobile parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. The number of automobile parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the number specified below for the various uses: 
(62.1)  Automobile sales and repair garages: one space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(62.2)  Gasoline filling stations: five spaces for each grease rack or similar facility plus one space for each gas pump attendant. 
(62.3)  Hospitals and nursing homes or similar institutions: one space for each three beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor and one space for each three employees. 
(62.4)  Hotels: one space for each two guest bedrooms plus one space for each four employees. 
(62.5)  Industrial use: one space for each two employees on a single shift plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(62.6)  Lodges and clubs: one space for each five members. 
(62.7)  Office building: one space for each 300 square feet of floor space. 
(62.8)  Places of amusement or assembly without fixed seats: one space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to patron use. 
(62.9)  Places of public assembly: one space for each four seats in the principal assembly room. 
(62.10)  Residential: one space for each dwelling unit. 
(62.11)  Restaurants: one space for each 75 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use, plus one space for each four employees. 
(62.12)  Retail business: one space for each 250 square feet of sales space. 
(62.13)  Rooming and boarding houses: one space for each two bedrooms. 
(62.14)  Schools: one space for each two faculty and staff employees; for each three other employees; and for each five high school students. 
(62.15)  Tourist courts and motels: one space for each accommodation. 
(62.16)  Trailer parks: one space for each trailer space. 
(62.17)  Wholesale business: one space for each two employees. Each space shall be at least 300 square feet in area and shall have vehicular access to a public street. Turning space shall be provided (except for single-family residences) so that no vehicle will be required to back into the street. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 70-31 et seq. 
Sec. 63. - Location of parking space on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided such property lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
Sec. 64. - Extension of parking spaces into a residential district. 
Required parking space may extend up to 120 feet into a residential zoning district, provided that: 
(a)  The parking space adjoins a commercial or industrial district; 
(b)  Has its only access to or fronts upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial district for which it provides required parking space; and 
(c)  Is visually separated from abutting properties in the adjoining residential district by a ten-foot-wide evergreen planted buffer strip. 
Sec. 65. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
On every lot on which a business, trade or industry is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. The minimum loading and unloading space required shall be: 
(65.1)  Retail business: one space of 300 square feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(65.2)  Wholesale and industry: one space of 500 square feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(65.3)  Bus and truck terminals: sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 70-31 et seq. 
ARTICLE VII. - USE PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 

[Sec. 70. - Purposes.] 
It is the intent of this ordinance that residential districts be reserved predominately for residence and contain public and semipublic uses which are necessary to serve the residents; to protect residents, as far as possible, against congestion and through traffic; to promote the stability and character of residential development; and to promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 71. - Agricultural district A-1. 
It is the intent of the A-1 agricultural district to provide for the continued existence of agricultural uses, and lower density residential development than is found in the R-1 residential district. The A-1 district comprises that portion of the City of Lyons which is primarily rural in nature, but which can be expected to experience urban development in the future. The following uses are permitted in the A-1 district: 
(71.1)  Any type of agriculture, except that no building housing cattle or poultry may be located within 300 feet of a district line. 
(71.2)  Any use permitted in the R-1 residential district. 
(71.3)  Hospitals. 
(71.4)  Cemeteries. 
(71.5)  Facilities providing municipal services. 
Sec. 72. - Single-family residential district R-1. 
The R-1 residential district is composed chiefly of existing low-density residential areas of the city, and vacant or open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to encourage similar and complementary type residential development together with associated recreational, religious and educational facilities. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district: 
(72.1)  Single-family dwellings, except trailers and mobile homes. 
(72.2)  Agriculture, excluding the commercial raising of poultry and livestock. 
(72.3)  Church bulletin boards not exceeding 20 square feet in area. 
(72.4)  Churches, fraternal organizations and clubs not operating for a profit; provided that: 
(a)  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear lines; and 
(b)  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any lot line. 
(72.5)  Customary accessory uses or buildings. 
(72.6)  Customary incidental home occupations including the professional offices of an architect, artist, dentist, engineer, lawyer, and physician provided there is no external evidence of such occupations except an announcement sign not more than two square feet in area and that the operations are conducted within a dwelling by not more than one person in addition to those persons resident therein. Off-street parking provisions of article VI, section 62, are applicable to incidental home occupations. 
(72.7)  Substations of utilities (low voltages) provided they are housed within a building architecturally similar to surrounding structures. 
(72.8)  Public buildings, structures and grounds, except cemeteries. 
(72.9)  Schools, including private schools, nursery schools and kindergartens. 
(72.10)  Signs not more than six square feet in area advertising the sale or rental of the property on which they are located. 
(72.11)  Hospitals and nursing homes. 
Sec. 73. - Multifamily residential district R-2. 
It is the intent of the R-2 residential district to provide for a less restricted type of residential development at higher densities but under similar environmental conditions as found in the R-1 district. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district: 
(73.1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district. 
(73.2)  Multifamily residences. 
(73.3)  Boarding and rooming houses. 
(73.4)  Cemeteries. 
(73.5)  Hospitals. 
(73.6)  House trailers (mobile homes or manufactured homes) shall be permitted provided that: 
(a)  A single house trailer or manufactured home shall be allowed on a single lot in the R-2 district provided said lot, whether existing or created, has the minimum square feet as herein specified for a lot in this district and provided that adequate sanitary sewage [sewer] facilities are installed or connected to as recommended by the state health department. 
(b)  House trailer or trailers (manufactured home or homes) shall be allowed in the R-2 district or [on] property that has been designed and developed as a trailer park, which has been constructed according to standards recommended by the American Mobile Home Association. 
(Ord. of 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 74. - R-2A district. 
In the R-2A district the following uses are permitted: 
(74.1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district. 
(74.2)  Multifamily residences. 
(74.3)  Boarding and rooming houses. 
(74.4)  Cemeteries. 
(74.5)  Hospitals. 
(Ord. of 6-24-1969) 
Sec. 75. - High density residential development, R-3. 
The purpose of this R-3 district is to provide a suitable area for development of planned residential communities at a higher density that allow a full range of residential uses and housing types, open space and green area. This area may include single-family, detached and/or attached patio homes and townhouses. 
(75.1)  Uses permitted. 
(a)  Single-family, detached and/or attached patio homes; 
(b)  Single-family, detached and/or attached townhouses. 
(c)  Any use permitted in the R-1 district. 
(75.2)  Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings and other structures erected or enlarged in this district shall be: 
(1)  For any dwelling, 35 feet and not to exceed three stories. 
(2)  For any building accessory to any dwelling 15 feet and not exceeding one story. 
(75.3)  Area, width and yard regulations. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(1)  Minimum lot area and width: A lot of not less than 5,000 square feet and a lot width of not less than 50 feet at the building line shall be provided for every building or other structure erected or used for any use permitted in this district. 
(2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall not be less than 50 feet in depth from the center line of all major streets and 35 feet from the right-of-way of all other streets. 
(3)  Side yard: On each interior lot there shall be two side yards, each having a width of not less than five feet. On each corner lot there shall be two side yards, the yard abutting the street having a width of not less than 35 feet from the right-of-way, and the side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than five feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard in each lot the depth of which shall not be less than 20 feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five feet to the rear property line and five feet to the side property line. 
(5)  Building coverage: Not more than 40 percent of the area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings. 
(b)  Two-family, twin dwelling and duplexes. 
(1)  Minimum lot area and width: A lot of not less than 8,000 square feet and a lot width of not less than 60 feet at the building line shall be provided. 
(2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall not be less than 50 feet in depth from the center line of all major streets and 35 feet from the right-of-way of all other streets. 
(3)  Side yard: On each interior lot there shall be two side yards, each having a width of not less than ten feet. On each corner lot there shall be two side yards, the yard abutting the street having a width of not less than 35 feet from the right-of-way, and the side yard not abutting the street having a width of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard in each lot the depth of which shall not be less than 20 feet, except that an accessory use structure may be erected within the rear yard not closer than five feet to the rear property line and five feet to the side property line. 
(5)  Building coverage: Not more than 40 percent of the area of any lot shall be occupied by buildings. 
(Ord. of 2-5-2002) 
ARTICLE VIII. - USE PROVISIONS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

[Sec. 80. - Purpose.] 
Business districts are established to provide locations for convenient exchange of goods and services in a reasonable and orderly manner; to protect the character and established pattern of desirable commercial development; to conserve the value of property; and to exclude those uses that are incompatible with designated uses for the districts. 
Sec. 81. - Central business district C-1. 
The C-1 zone is established to protect present business and commercial uses; to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to the function of the central business area; and to encourage intensive development of this zone as the shopping and business center of the City of Lyons and surrounding trade area. The following uses are permitted in the C-1 district: 
(81.1)  Any retail business or service, including manufacturing in connection with a retail store or shop providing that such manufacturing is incidental to the retail use and all goods manufactured are sold on the premises. 
(81.2)  Automobile salesrooms and repair garages. 
(81.3)  Bus terminals and taxicab stands. 
(81.4)  Clubs and lodges. 
(81.5)  Funeral parlors. 
(81.6)  Gasoline service stations, provided that points of access and egress shall be located not less than ten feet from the intersection of street lines; shall not exceed 40 feet in width; and shall not be closer than 20 feet apart. 
(81.7)  Hotels and motels. 
(81.8)  Offices and banks. 
(81.9)  Newspapers and printing plants. 
(81.10)  Off-street parking lots. 
(81.11)  Professional offices for physicians, dentists, lawyers, engineers and the like. 
(81.12)  Public uses and structures. 
(81.13)  Public utility structures. 
(81.14)  Radio stations. 
(81.15)  Restaurants, bars, grills and similar eating and/or drinking establishments, excluding drive-ins. 
(81.16)  Signs: outdoor advertising and professional or announcement. 
(81.17)  Theaters, indoor. 
(81.18)  Mobile food vendors. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 82. - Highway commercial district C-2. 
The C-2 commercial district is intended primarily for the development of those business activities which cater to the needs of highway traffic. The following uses are permitted in the C-2 district: 
(82.1)  Retail shops customarily serving tourist or highway trade. 
(82.2)  Automobile parts sales stores. 
(82.3)  Automobile salesrooms and used car lots. 
(82.4)  Bus terminals. 
(82.5)  Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(82.6)  Drive-in theaters. 
(82.7)  Drugstores. 
(82.8)  Gasoline service stations, provided that points of access and egress shall be located not less than ten feet from the intersection of street lines; shall not exceed 30 feet in width; and shall not be closer than 40 feet apart. 
(82.9)  Motels. 
(82.10)  Off-street parking lots. 
(82.11)  Public and semipublic recreation facilities, including bowling alleys and miniature golf courses. 
(82.12)  Public uses and structures. 
(82.13)  Repair garages. 
(82.14)  Restaurants, grills and similar eating establishments, including drive-ins. 
(82.15)  Reserved. 
(82.16)  Signs: outdoor advertising and professional or announcement. 
(82.17)  Funeral homes and florist shops. 
(82.18)  Mobile food vendors. 
(Ord. of 1-4-1999; Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
ARTICLE IX. - USE PROVISIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

[Sec. 90. - Purpose.] 
Industrial districts are established to provide areas to meet the needs of the city's present and future manufacturing uses, with consideration given to the need for a choice of sites including access to various transportation facilities; and to protect adjacent residential and commercial uses and existing industries within the districts. 
Sec. 91. - Light industrial district I-1. 
The I-1 light industrial district is established to provide an area for firms engaged in light manufacturing and distribution of goods; to discourage uses incompatible with light manufacturing; to protect the surrounding land uses; and to protect the existing industries within the district. The following uses are permitted in the I-1 district: 
(91.1)  Agricultural equipment sales and repair. 
(91.2)  Apparel manufacturing plants. 
(91.3)  Baking establishments. 
(91.4)  Bottling and distribution plants. 
(91.5)  Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(91.6)  Cabinet and woodworking shops. 
(91.7)  Electrical repair shops. 
(91.8)  Gasoline service stations, according to the provisions specified in subsection (82.1). 
(91.9)  Ice plants and cold storage plants. 
(91.10)  Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments. 
(91.11)  Public utility structures. 
(91.12)  Restaurants, cafes and similar establishments. 
(91.13)  Truck terminals and warehouses. 
(91.14)  Wholesale and storage businesses including building material yards. 
(91.15)  Other light industries, provided that any industry that may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazards or other objectionable condition, shall be required to show that the proposed location, construction and operation will not injure present or prospective industrial development in the district. 
(91.16)  Mobile food vendors. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 92. - Heavy industrial district I-2. 
The I-2 district is established to provide a suitable area for the location of heavy manufacturing plants, to protect the surrounding land uses, to protect the industries located in the district, and to discourage uses that are incompatible with those designated for this district. The following uses are permitted in the I-2 district: 
(92.1)  Any use permitted in an I-1 district. 
(92.2)  Bulk storage of petroleum. 
(92.3)  Concrete batch plants. 
(92.4)  Metal fabricating plants. 
(92.5)  Millwork and flooring processing. 
(92.6)  Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(92.7)  Railroad terminals and warehouses. 
(92.8)  Radio transmission towers. 
(92.9)  Stockyards for livestock and swine, slaughterhouses and the processing of poultry and livestock. 
(92.10)  Textile manufacturing and processing. 
(92.11)  Other heavy industries, provided that any industry that may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable condition, shall be required to show that such conditions will not adversely affect the surrounding districts. 
(92.12)  Mobile food vendors. 
(Ord. No. 0719201601, 7-19-2016) 
ARTICLE X. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

[Sec. 100. - Purpose; table.] 
This article is established to identify the minimum lot size and width; front and side yard setbacks; and building height allowed within each designated district. 

 
(Amd. No. 01-04, 9-14-2004) 
ARTICLE XI. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

[Sec. 110. - Purposes.] 
This article is established to provide relief from unnecessary hardships that may occur from the application of this ordinance to a specific piece of property. Further, it is intended to provide for the establishment of group project developments that could not reasonably adhere to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 111. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots of record at the time of the enactment of this ordinance did not at that time own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance; or if the topography, physical shape or other unique feature of such lots of record prevent reasonable compliance with the setback or other requirements of this ordinance, such plot of land may nevertheless be used as a building site. The yard and other space requirements of the district in which the piece of land is located may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable use of the property as a building site; however, in no case shall the building inspector permit any lot in a residential district to be used as a building site which is less than 4,000 square feet in total area, 25 feet in width, or has front, side and rear yard setbacks of less than 15 feet (front), three feet (side), and five feet (rear), respectively. 
Sec. 112. - Front-yard setback for dwellings. 
The front-yard setback requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the setback of an existing building or buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the required minimum setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the setbacks of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
Sec. 113. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes and similar structures not intended for human occupancy; nor the monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio or television towers, or aerials, except in the vicinity of airports. 
Sec. 114. - Corner lots. 
The side-yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same as the front setback requirements for the next adjacent lot fronting on the street that the side yard of the corner lot faces. 
Sec. 115. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the central business district (C-1), no fence, walls, shrubbery or other obstruction (excluding traffic and street signs) to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or railroads. 
Sec. 116. - Group projects. 
A group project (housing, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, civic) of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of land of at least two acres not subdivided into customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, may be constructed provided: 
(116.1)  Uses are limited to these permitted within the district in which the project is located. 
(116.2)  The overall intensity of land use is no higher and the standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(116.3)  Building heights do not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(116.4)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet the front-yard setback and side-yard requirements of the district in which the project is located. 
(116.5)  If the project is a planned shopping center, it shall be located on a major thoroughfare. 
(116.6)  Off-street automobile parking space requirements for the proposed uses are provided for on the lot as specified by article VI, section 62. 
(116.7)  If the project lies within or abuts upon a residential district, there shall be a ten-foot-wide, appropriately planted, buffer strip along the rear or side lot lines abutting the residential properties. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

[Sec. 120. - Purposes of article.] 
The intent of this article is to provide for suitable and proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance; to designate the enforcing officer and to outline the proper steps to be taken by parties interested in constructing, erecting or modifying a structure or other land use; and to set forth the penalties for violating the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 121. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector and he is hereby given the authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 122. - Building permit required. 
No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 123. - Application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures; the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered; and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
Sec. 124. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
(124.1)  Any lot or a change in the use thereof. 
(124.2)  A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building. 
(124.3)  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered or rebuilt thereafter. 
The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this ordinance. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
Sec. 125. - Penalties for violation. 
Upon conviction, any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction and [shall] be punished according to law. Each day such violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 126. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector or other appropriate authority or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate civil action in proceeding to stop the violations in the case of such building, structure or land. 
ARTICLE XIII. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 

[Sec. 130. - Purpose of article.] 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the building inspector. 
Sec. 131. - Appeal to the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved because of an alleged error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in enforcement of this ordinance may appeal in writing to the city clerk for and receive a hearing by the city attorney for an interpretation of pertinent ordinance provisions. In exercising this power of interpretation of the ordinance, the city attorney may, in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector. 
Sec. 132. - Appeal from the city attorney. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the city attorney may seek review of such decision by a court of record, as provided by law. 
ARTICLE XIV. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 140. - Purpose of article. 
This article is established to provide a means whereby certain desirable changes and additions can be made to the zoning ordinance from time to time. These amendments should relate to the comprehensive plan and the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1986) 
Sec. 141. - Amendment procedure. 
The city council of the City of Lyons may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this zoning ordinance, including the zoning district boundaries and map, by proceeding in the following manner, and as otherwise required by law. In amending the zoning map or regulation, the city council shall use the "Standards for Zoning Decisions" as adopted by the City of Lyons. 
(141.1)  The city council, or its delegated agent, shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance or map. This public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the "Policies and Procedures for the Call and Conduct of Zoning Public Hearings," as adopted by the City of Lyons. 
(141.2)  At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days in advance of the required public hearing, notice of the required public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Lyons. Said notice shall, at the minimum and in all cases, state the time, date, place, and purpose of the public hearing. If particular property is to be rezoned, the notice shall, in addition, state the location of the property involved, the present zoning classification of the property involved and the proposed zoning classification of the property involved. 
(141.3)  If particular property is involved in a proposed amendment initiated by a party other than the local government, additional public notice in the form of a sign erected in a conspicuous location on the property in question shall be required. The party initiating the amendment shall at his expense cause to be erected, in such conspicuous location as the zoning enforcement officer may direct, a sign of not less than nine square feet with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background, which shall read as follows: 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  ZONING CHANGE 
A Public Hearing will be held at City Hall at (time) (a.m. or p.m.) on (date), (year), to consider rezoning of this property from (present zoning classification) to (requested zoning classification). 
Said sign shall be erected not less than 15 days in advance of the required public hearing and shall remain posted through the date of the required public hearing. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1986) 
State Law reference— Notice of zoning changes required, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 142. - Referral to planning commission. 
Before adoption, all proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Lyons Planning Commission for its recommendation and report which shall not be binding. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit a report and shall use the city's adopted "Standards for Zoning Decisions," as appropriate, as the basis of its recommendation and report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report with [within] the 30-day period, the city council may consider the amendment on its merits without recommendation and report of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1986) 
Sec. 143. - Limit on consideration of amendments. 
Upon final action by the city council resulting in the defeat of an amendment proposing zoning change of particular property, the property in question may not again be considered for rezoning amendment until a period of at least six months has elapsed. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1986) 
Sec. 144. - Petition for amendment. 
Any person or party other than the city council may request an amendment to the zoning ordinance or map by filing a petition for amendment, together with such payment as the city council may set from time to time to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the city clerk. Said petition for amendment shall contain the following: 
(a)  Applicant's name and address and his representative and the interest of every party represented in the application. 
(b)  A plat of the property involved prepared by a Georgia-registered surveyor. 
(c)  A sketch showing the extent of the area to be rezoned, streets bounding and intersecting the area, and the land use and zone classification of abutting properties. 
(d)  A site plan to scale, showing existing and proposed development and indicating the locations of structures, uses, setback distances and area for off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  An approximate time schedule for the beginning and completion of development in the area. 
(f)  A statement of the circumstances in the proposed district and the abutting districts and any other factors which the applicant contends are valid reasons for supporting the proposed rezoning. The applicant shall demonstrate that there are objective facts supporting proposed rezoning and that the rezoning is in the best interests of the city as related to the city's adopted "Standards for Zoning Decisions." 
Said petition for amendment shall be considered by the city council in the same manner as outlined in sections 141, 142 and 143. All requirements of article XIV are applicable. 
(Ord. of 8-5-1986) 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

[Sec. 150. - Purpose of article.] 
This article is established to present the legal status of this ordinance and to resolve differences and conflicts between this ordinance and other ordinances. 
Sec. 151. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Sec. 152. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 153. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1977 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, as updated through November 9, 1999, which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1977 Code, as updated through November 9, 1999, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede November 9, 1999, but which were never included in the 1977 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since November 9, 1999, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the official Code of Georgia Annoteted (O.C.G.A.). 

 