CODE OF ORDINANCES OF BULLOCH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: August 18, 1992 
Effective: August 18, 1992 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of 
BULLOCH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert T. Cox, Chairman 
Gordon Alston, Commissioner 
Raybon Anderson, Commissioner 
Thomas Anderson, Commissioner 
Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 
E. Scott Wood 
County Manager 
____________ 
Evelyn H. Wilson 
Commission Clerk 
____________ 
James B. Franklin 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Robert T. Cox, Chairman of the Board of Commissioners, and Ms. Evelyn H. Wilson, Clerk of the Board of Commissioners, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF AUGUST 18, 1992 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Bulloch County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Bulloch County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 13 and Appendices A and B, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 21, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinance[s] adopted after January 21, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. The ordinance shall become effective August 18, 1992. 
Passed and Adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County this 18th day of August, 1992. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization of governing authority to adopt ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Bulloch County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the board of commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Chairman, other officers and officials. Whenever the word "chairman" is used it shall mean the chairman of the board of commissioners of Bulloch County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Bulloch County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Bulloch County, Georgia. 
County manager means the county manager of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioners' office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week, of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County, as follows:" 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Bulloch County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Bulloch County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An order and judgment entered on May 26, 1983 by the United States District Court, Southern District of Georgia in civil action CV679-37 provides that the county shall have four county commissioners including one full time chairman elected at large. The order and judgment further provide for the division of the county into election districts, the means of electing commissioners, their terms and other matters relevant to the composition and operation of the board of commissioners. A copy of the subject order and decree is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners where it is available for reference and review. 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 1; county officers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; supplementary powers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-25. - Board of commissioners of Bulloch County. 
(a)  The county government shall consist of a chairperson and six district commissioners who are hereby constituted under the name and style of the "Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia", and by such name they shall have such authority and power as provided by law. 
Note— The United States District Court for the Southern District of Georgia on April 22, 1992, ordered the board of commissioners of Bulloch County to adopt a plan for electing county commissioners in Bulloch County and the court modified its order on April 24, 1992. 
(b)  The term of office of all members of the board of commissioners of the county shall be four years. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall consist of a part-time chairperson and six part-time district commissioners elected as follows: 
(1)  The part-time chairperson shall be elected from the county at large; 
(2)  The six district commissioners shall be elected from two districts, District 1 and District 2. Two commissioners shall be elected at large from District 1 and the seats shall be designated as 1-A and 1-B. Four commissioners shall be elected at large from District 2 and the seats shall be designated as 2-A, 2-B, 2-C and 2-D. 
(3)  The vice-chairperson position shall be filled by each of the six district commissioners and shall serve a one year term, beginning in 1993, on a rotating basis in the following order: 1-A, 2-A, 2-B, 1-B, 2-C, 2-D, 1-A, etc. 
(4)  The chairperson or his designee shall represent the county at various functions. 
Note— Local legislation, signed into law by Governor Zell Miller on April 6, 1992, provides that the chairperson of Bulloch County should not be required to devote his or her full time to the chairperson's duties. 
(Amend. of 4-24-92, § 1; Amd. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-26. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month and on the third Tuesday of each month at such times as the board, from time to time, may designate by resolution; provided, however, that regular meetings may be rescheduled because of conflicts or other circumstances. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or any two members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)  Meetings shall be held at the Bulloch County Courthouse Annex, 115 North Main Street, Statesboro, Georgia, or such other place as the board of commissioners designates subject to the notice provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
(d)  At the first meeting of each calendar year, the board of commissioners shall announce for the record the names of the vice-chairperson, county manager, county attorney, and county auditor for that particular calendar year. 
(e)  Each year the board of commissioners shall have a planning meeting prior to commencement of the budget process. The time, place, and duration of this planning meeting shall be determined by the board of commissioners on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, 6-5-90; Ord. No. 1990-27, 9-25-90; Amend. of 4-24-92, § 2; Amend. of 12-15-92; Amd. of 10-7-03) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-27. - Duty of members to attend meetings. 
It shall be the duty of each member of the board of commissioners to attend each meeting of the board, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 1-1001, 6-5-90) 
Sec. 2-28. - Meeting organization and public access. 
(a)  Open Meetings. All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(b)  Abstentions. A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless the commissioner has a conflict of interest which would prevent the commissioner from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall state for the record the decision to abstain on any vote. 
(c)  Chairman. 
(1)  The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chairman may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the chairman may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session as authorized by section 1-18. 
(2)  The chairman shall not vote except in the case of a tie vote among the other six commissioners, the chairman then voting to break the tie. 
(d)  Agenda. 
(1)  The county manager, with the advice of the chairman and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. All commissioners are encouraged to suggest agenda items as deemed appropriate. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board meeting. 
(2)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the county manager and received at least five business days before the meeting. 
(3)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new subject that requires attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(e)  Consent agenda. 
(1)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the county manager for the board to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(2)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairman shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairman shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairman will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
(f)  Minutes. 
(1)  The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(2)  The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Order of business. All regular board meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Minutes. 
(3)  Invited guests. 
(4)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(5)  Consent agenda. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Public comments. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(h)  Decorum. 
(1)  All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(2)  The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or he can allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(i)  Public participation. Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county manager at least three business days before the board meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may only speak once. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the board. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
(4)  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to, during (on announcement), or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing; however, once the public hearing is closed, the board may act. 
(j)  Parliamentarian. The county staff attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(k)  Executive sessions. 
(1)  Executive session of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
(2)  No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners upon a majority vote of the board. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceeding have been initiated. 
(l)  Visual and sound recordings. Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(m)  Any three district commissioners, plus the chairperson of the board of commissioners, or any four district commissioners in the absence of the chairperson shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the board. 
(n)  All commissioners except the chairman shall have one vote each. The chairman shall have one vote if and only if there is a tie in the votes of the other commissioners. 
(o)  In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall act on behalf of the chairperson. If the chairperson is absent from a meeting, the vice-chairperson shall preside over meetings. If the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent from a meeting, an acting chairperson shall be elected by majority vote of the members present at the meeting. When presiding over a meeting, the vice-chairperson or the acting chairperson shall not vote except in the case of a tie vote among the other commissioners, the vice-chairperson or acting chairperson then voting to break the tie. 
(p)  An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board entitled to vote and present shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business except that for which a larger vote has been mandated by these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 1-1002, 6-5-90; Amend. of 4-24-92, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 1997-24, 9-2-97; Amend. of 6-20-00; Amd. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-29. - Parliamentary procedure for counties. 
(a)  Main motion. In order for a board to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the commissioner seconding the motion to support the motion. A commissioner may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the board has voted on that motion. 
(b)  Debate. After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the board shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairman in a manner that is fair to all members of the board. Commissioners can participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairman. During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the board take a particular action on a motion (subsection (e), below). There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. Commissioners may also introduce privileged motions (subsection (f), below). Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(c)  Voting procedure. Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions. 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the chairman calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the board may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The chairman will then read the proposed motion to the board and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The chairman shall read the proposed motion to the board and then call for the vote. 
(d)  Ranking of motions. Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the board returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the top of the following list take precedence over motions at the bottom of the list. 
(1)  Privileged motions (undebatable). 
a.  Adjourn. 
b.  Recess. 
c.  Question of privilege. 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable). 
a.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
b.  Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.  Limit or extend limits of debate. 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (debatable). 
a.  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
b.  Refer to committee (commit). 
c.  Amend. 
d.  Postpone indefinitely. 
(4)  Other motions. 
a.  Main motion. 
b.  Reserved. 
(e)  Subsidiary motions. During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce motions that propose that the board take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a board to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions, amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also can apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered by the board, that commissioner may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled for the duration of the meeting. A motion to postpone indefinitely can be debated but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a commissioner believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. A motion cannot be amended more than two times. Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. Debate is limited to the proposed amendment. A majority vote is required for the board to adopt an amendment. If the amendment is adopted then the board shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a commissioner believes that further information is needed before the board can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to commit should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the board. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the chairman will bring the original motion back to the board for consideration at the specified time which may be at the same meeting, at a subsequent meeting, or upon the occurrence of a specified event. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the commissioner who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a commissioner believes debate on a motion should end and that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the commissioner can move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the board is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the same meeting. The main motion can be brought back for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the board during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(f)  Privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a commissioner or of the board as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time when business is still pending. It is a temporary intermission of the proceedings. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a commissioner must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(g)  Incidental motions. Incidental motions allow commissioners to exert their rights as a member of the board. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a commissioner disagrees with a ruling that is made by the chair, that commissioner may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the board. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The board may then debate the appeal. The board shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a commissioner has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the board. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a commissioner believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the board to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request for information). If a commissioner has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(h)  Supplementary main motions. Three motions allow the board to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the board. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified below. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the board to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the board to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any commissioner can make a motion to reconsider and any commissioner may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the board is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the board will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the board overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any commissioner. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the commissioner seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the board shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the board to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 1997-24, 9-2-97) 
ARTICLE IIA. - COUNTY ETHICS CODE 

Sec. 2-30. - Short title. 
This article will be known as and may be referred and cited as the "Ethics Code of Bulloch County" ("ethics code"). 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-31. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county believes that public service is a public trust. Maintaining that public trust requires the county to protect against improper influence or the appearance of improper influence. The purpose should be to ensure that public officials will be impartial and use independent judgment in carrying out their duties. To help ensure this quality, the board of commissioners finds and declares the need to establish appropriate ethical standards for conduct. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of the county does not intend that this article impede the desire for those who want to seek and serve in public office. To this end, public officials should not, except as otherwise provided by law, be denied the opportunity available to all other citizens. Public service should not restrict the ability to acquire and maintain private, economic and other interests. Only in those cases in which a conflict of the public's trust and interest would result should a restriction be applied. 
(c)  This ethics code follows the precedent of earlier federal, state and local codes. It makes clear those standards of ethical conduct that will apply to public officials in the discharge of their official duties; implements the objective of protecting the integrity of the government; and prescribes only such essential restrictions against conflicts of interest so as not to impose unnecessary barriers against public service. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-32. - Definitions. 
The words used in this article shall have their normal accepted meanings except as set-forth below: 
Agency. Any entity which the board of commissioners determines is subject to the legislative authority of the county with respect to the ethics code. 
Business/business entity. Any entity, regardless of forms, whether or not operated for profit, including, but not limited to, any corporation, general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, association, firm, institution, trust, person or foundation. 
Censure. Any expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Employee or public employee. Any person, employed full or part-time by the county government. The board of commissioners of the county and appointed and elected officials shall not be considered employees but are defined in this chapter. 
Employer. Any person paying or agreeing to pay compensation to another person for services rendered. 
Financial interest. 
(1)  Any source of income, direct or indirect, from which a person has received, within the past 12 months, or is presently receiving more than $500.00 per year; or; 
(2)  Ownership, legal or equitable, of more than ten percent of a business entity; or 
(3)  Ownership of any interest having a fair market value of more than $20,000.00. 
(g)  Gift. The transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. "Gift" does not include the solicitation, acceptance, receipt, or regulation of political campaign contributions. A gift shall be further defined as a subscription, membership, loan, forgiveness of debt, advance or deposit of money or anything of value, conveyed or transferred. 
(h)  Immediate relative/relatives. Spouse, children, step-children, siblings, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, and spouse of such persons. 
(i)  Interests. Any legal or equitable economic interest, whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition, which was owned or held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly. 
(j)  Person. Any individual, employee or entity. 
(k)  Public officer or officer or officials. The members of the board of commissioners the county and other elected or appointed officials. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-33. - Compliance with applicable law. 
No officer shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him or her by virtue of their office. Other provisions of law or regulations relating to this article shall apply when any provisions of this article shall conflict with the laws of the state or the United States of America. The laws of the state or the United States of America shall apply when this article is silent. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-34. - Impartiality. 
(a)  Officers must not take part in any personal, business, or professional activity or receive or retain any direct or indirect financial interest that places them in a position of conflict between their private interest and public interest that relate to their responsibilities and duties as officers. 
(b)  Officers must not use their positions to induce, coerce, or influence a person or employee (including subordinates) in a way that would provide any benefits, financial or otherwise, to themselves or others or any organization of which they are a member thereof. 
(c)  No officer shall: 
(1)  Use public office for private gain. 
(2)  Give preferential treatment to any person. 
(3)  Impede government efficiency and economy. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-35. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this code of ethics for any officer to participate directly or indirectly through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation or in any other manner upon the following: 
(1)  Any proceeding, application, vote, request for ruling, claim, controversy, contract or any other matter involving an immediate relative or any interest of an immediate relative of the officer. 
(2)  Any matter in which the officer has a financial interest, a fiduciary interest, a corporate interest, or an employment interest. 
(3)  No officer should invest or hold any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with and/or adversely affects such official duties of the officer. However, should the same exist, such officer shall either: 
a.  Abstain. 
b.  In the event abstention is not required, disclose such interest prior to taking any action on the matter by duly noting such conflict for recording in the minutes of the meeting. 
(b)  It is hereby declared that it is not the intent of this article to prohibit an immediate relative of an officer from being engaged in gainful employment in the county. The county shall not be prohibited from doing business with an entity which employs an immediate relative of an officer provided: 
(1)  That such business relationship does not violate this article; 
(2)  That such business relationship is fully disclosed in writing; 
(3)  That, where applicable, the affected business entity shall be required to use the bid system when conducting business with the county. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-36. - Financial disclosure. 
Financial disclosures shall be governed by federal and state law, and this code of ethics shall not require any additional reports to be filed. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-37. - Interest and contracts involving officers. 
(a)  While an official matter is pending, or an application is likely, no officer shall acquire or own an interest in any contract or transaction if a reasonable basis exists that such an interest will be affected directly by his/her official act or action or by official acts or actions of the county. 
(b)  The county shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with an officer, or with a business in which the officer has an interest. Provided that such is disclosed to all parties involved, the prohibitions of this section shall not apply in case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers competitive rates for such loans. 
(3)  Contracts entered into with a business which employs a consultant, provided that such employment is not incompatible with this ethics code. 
(4)  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services. 
(5)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which would constitute an emergency situation, provided that such emergency is documented and submitted to the board of commissioner to be kept on file. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-38. - Use of prestige of office; harassment; improper influence. 
(a)  An official shall not intentionally use the prestige of his/her office or official title or position for his/her own personal gain or that of another. The performance of usual and customary constituent services, without additional compensation, does not constitute the use of prestige of office prohibited by this section. 
(b)  No official shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, discriminate against, or give the appearance of, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce or discriminate against any employee for the purpose of interfering with that person's freedom of choice in the regular discharge of his or her official duties. 
(c)  No official shall improperly influence any public official to violate the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this ethics code. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-39. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no official, either for himself or herself, or any member of the immediate family of such official, or for any other person, may knowingly solicit, receive, benefit from, accept, or agree to accept any gratuity, gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself, herself, and other person or any member of the immediate family of such official if: 
(1)  It tends to influence him or her in the discharge of official duties or gives a reasonable basis for the impression of improper influence over him or her in the discharge of official duties. 
(2)  The official has financial interest which may be substantially and materially affected, by performance or non-performance of his/her official duties. 
(b)  Unless impartiality and independence of judgment of the official would be compromised this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Meals and beverages given in the normal course of entertaining. 
(2)  An occasional, nonpecuniary gift from a single source of $50.00 or less. 
(3)  Ceremonial gifts or awards. 
(4)  Gifts of advertising value only. 
(5)  Awards presented in recognition of public service. 
(6)  Reasonable expenses of food, travel, lodging and scheduled entertainment of the official for a meeting which is given in return for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting. 
(7)  Courtesy tickets or free admission extended to an elected official for an event as a courtesy or for ceremonial purposes. 
(8)  Gifts from relatives or members of his/her household. 
(9)  Honorariums or awards for professional achievement. 
(10)  Courtesy tickets or free admission to an elected official to educational seminars, educational or informational conventions or other similar events. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-40. - Salary advances prohibited. 
Salary advances to commissioners, employees, and other appointed or elected officials shall be absolutely prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-41. - Disclosure of confidential information. 
No officer shall use or disclose confidential information concerning the property, governing operations, policies or affairs of the county, unless such information is generally available to the public; nor shall any officer use such information to advance the financial or personal interest of the officer or any other person. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-42. - Abstention. 
An officer who has an interest that he or she has reason to believe either violated this code of ethics or may affect his or her official acts or actions shall abstain from participating in any official acts or actions related to it. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-43. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, a person who is subject to the provisions of this article and who is found by the board of commissioners to have violated its provisions may, in the case of a public official, be subject to censure or reprimand. 
(b)  Upon direction of the board of commissioners, a petition may be filed for injunctive relief, or any other appropriate relief, in the superior court of the county, or in any other court having proper venue and jurisdiction, for the purpose of requiring compliance with the provisions of this article. In addition, the court may issue an order to cease and desist from the violation of this article. The court also may void an official action taken by an official which action was prohibited by this article, provided that the legal action to void the matter was brought within 30 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public. The court, after hearing and considering all the circumstances in the case, may grant all or part of the relief sought. However, the court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes or other evidences of public obligation. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-44. - Civil recovery. 
The value of anything received by any person for violations of this article, as determined by the board of commissioners, shall be recoverable from such person by the county by appropriate legal action or proceedings or by a taxpayer of the county acting on behalf of the county after a written demand to the county to bring such action, and failure of the county to initiate the action within 60 days after receipt of the demand. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-45. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of commissioners with regard to this article may appeal to the superior court of the county, except, however that said appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision being appealed. Said appeal shall be based upon the record. No party shall be entitled to a de novo appeal. Upon failure to file said appeal within 30 days of the decision being appealed, the decision shall be binding and final upon all parties. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-46. - Official liability. 
No member of the board of commissioners or any person acting on behalf of the board of commissioners, shall be liable to any person for any damages arising out of the enforcement or operation of the ethics code of the county, except in the case of willful or malicious negligence. This limitation of liability shall apply to the county, the members of the board, the employees of the board and any person acting under direction of the board. 
(Ord. of 10-7-03) 
Secs. 2-47—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; personnel management system, App. A. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-51—2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 

Sec. 2-66. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the office of county manager of Bulloch County. The manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. In addition to the duties contained herein, the manager shall assume all such other duties as assigned by the board from time to time and as contained in any job description for the position as may be adopted by the board and as same may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § II, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 2-67. - Qualifications. 
The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this division or as further defined by the board. No member of the board shall be appointed manager during the term of office for which he is elected. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § III, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 2-68. - Duties. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall continue to be the chief executive officer of the county and the board shall continue to be the executive entity of the county. It shall be the duty of the board to set overall executive policy and procedures for the county. The county manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and head of the administrative branch of county government. The manager shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county over which the manager has jurisdiction in accordance with the manager's job description. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § IV, 3-19-91; Amd. of 10-7-03) 
Sec. 2-69. - Additional responsibilities. 
The board of commissioners shall have full authority to assign additional responsibilities to the county manager or to restrict or modify the responsibilities previously assigned. The modifications in responsibilities as contemplated herein may be established by the board by ordinance, written directives to the manager, modification of job descriptions or by such other method as may be determined by the board consistent with good management practices. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § V, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 2-70. - Term of office. 
The county manager shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners for an indefinite term as an at-will employee and may be terminated by majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § VI, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 2-71. - Bond. 
The county manager shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the county, such bond to be approved by the board of commissioners and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the manager. The amount of the bond shall be determined from time to time by the board and the cost of procurement of the bonds shall be the responsibility of the county. The bond shall be delivered to the board within five days of the manager assuming the duties of office and shall be filed by the chairman of the board in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § VII, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 2-72. - Compliance with all applicable laws, policies, etc. 
All actions of the county manager shall be taken and performed consistent with and in compliance with all federal and state laws, local ordinances and policies and directives as may be established by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, § IX, 3-19-91) 
Secs. 2-73—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91—2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Development authorities law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-106. - Authorization, creation. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of the Development Authorities Law of Georgia, codified in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., adopted by the general assembly pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, art. IX, sec. VI, par. III, the board of commissioners declares that there is a need for a development authority to function in the county in accordance with the provisions of the Development Authorities Law. 
(b)  The authority shall be known as the Development Authority of Bulloch County. 
(Res. of 7-13-83, § 2) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of August 18, 1998 repealed chapter 3, §§ 3-1—3-64, in its entirety. Former chapter 3 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 1991-15, §§ 1.01—1.04, I, adopted Sept. 24, 1991; and from an Ord. of April 16, 1991, §§ II—IV, VI-IX. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 8; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 10; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification; seller's duty to request proper identification; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  Insuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant, private club, or farm winery as defined in this chapter; 
(4)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; and 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the county, rather than a right. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 8-1-06(1)) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, from whatever source or whatever process produced. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
(2.5)  Authorized catered function means a function that has been authorized by an event permit issued by the local political subdivision where the function is domiciled in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 3, ch. 11. 
(3)  Board means the Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(4)  County means Bulloch County, Georgia and when used in a geographical sense means the unincorporated area of the county. 
(5)  County clerk means the clerk of the board of commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(6)  Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
(6.5)  Farm winery means a farm winery as defined in O.C.G.A. tit. 3, ch. 6, art. 2 and in appendix C, zoning of the County Code. 
(7)  Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
(8)  Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
(9)  Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the "licensed premises". However, no more than one building shall be deemed the "licensed premises" for a single license, regardless of whether an adjacent building may be connected to the "licensed premises" by a sidewalk, breezeway, enclosed walkway, or any other means of passage from one building to another. 
(10)  Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
(11)  Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation, the "majority stockholder" is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each owns more of the voting stock than any other person, then any one of such persons may act as the "majority stockholder." 
(12)  Malt beverage means fermented beverage made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented substance. 
(13)  Mixed drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
(14)  Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to section 3-27. 
(15)  Person includes a corporation, partnership, association, club or institution. 
(16)  Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person engaged in distributing or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale. 
(b)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in comparable provisions of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, Title 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the singular and plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(d)  As used in this chapter the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04; Amd. of 8-1-06(1); Amd. Of 2-21-12) 
Secs. 3-3—3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 3-26. - Required classifications, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the county except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Annual license fees shall be payable in advance for an entire calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the same year. Annual license fees shall be as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. 
(c)  Classes of licenses issued under this chapter, and activities permitted and regulated thereunder, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Retail package licenses: 
Package sales for off-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine. 
(2)  Retail consumption on the premises licenses: 
Pouring license for malt beverages and wine only on the premises. 
Pouring license for consumption of distilled spirits only on the premises. 
Pouring license for retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)  Wholesale licenses: 
Resident wholesale dealer's license: wholesale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by a wholesale dealer having a place of business in the county. 
Non-resident wholesale dealer's license: wholesale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by a wholesale dealer not having a place of business in the county. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverage caterer licenses: 
Alcoholic beverage caterer license authorizing the sale of malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer license authorizing the sale of distilled spirits by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer license authorizing the sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(5)  Farm winery licenses : Subject to proper licensing from the state, a farm winery licensee may engage in retail sales of wine by the package, retail sales of wine for consumption on the premises, and may sell its wine at wholesale. 
(d)  Application fees. Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(e)  Transfer fees. Each application for the transfer of a license pursuant to section 3-32 of this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee in an amount as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(f)  Payment of fees. Application and transfer fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. An applicant may pay the annual license fee at the time the application is filed; and in such event the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license applied for is not issued. If the annual license fee is not paid at the time of the application, the annual license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license by the board and no later than 14 days after notification of approval of the license by the board. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04; Amd. of 8-1-06(1); Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-27. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued (i) in the name of the partnership and (ii) in the name of one of the general partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued (i) in the name of the corporation and (ii) in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation or the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, and such majority stockholder or officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, each general partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each general partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein. 
(c)  In the case of a corporation, the majority stockholder or officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein; provided, however, that the board may require the fingerprinting and investigation of any of the officers and shareholders of the corporation if the board deems it necessary in making its investigation. 
(d)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-28. - Exemption for previously licensed businesses. 
In the event a business located in an unincorporated area of the county held licenses as of the effective date of this chapter from the state and the county which allowed the business to dispense malt beverages and wine on the business premises in broken, opened or unsealed containers, such business shall be required to comply with this chapter in all respects, with the following exception: with respect to the sale of malt beverages and wine, such business shall not be subject to the requirement that at least 50 percent of its gross income be derived from the sale of food prepared, served and consumed on the premises, nor any of the accompanying reporting requirements concerning the service of food. However, the foregoing exception shall not apply if the business obtains a pouring license for distilled spirits pursuant to section 3-26(a)(2)(b) or a pouring license for distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages pursuant to section 3-26(a)(2)(C). In the event a business exempted from the requirements as stated herein is sold, transferred or assigned, the exemption with the requirements stated herein shall remain in effect for the transferee, assignee or purchaser. If a business, its heirs, successors or assigns which is exempted from the requirement as stated herein ceases to sell and/or dispense malt beverages or wine for a period of 60 days, then the exemption shall lapse and the resumption of the business shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter concerning licensing and the sale of malt beverages and wine within the county; provided, however that in the event the cessation of activity is the result of fire or similar hazard, natural disaster, major renovation or expansion for which a building permit is obtained, then the 60-day period shall be tolled during a time in which the license holder makes a reasonably diligent effort to repair or renovate the business and resume activity, but in no event shall the time be tolled more than one year. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-29. - Qualifications. 
(a)  A licensee or designee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. A licensee must be a resident of Bulloch County, except that the named licensee shall not be required to be a resident of Bulloch County if the named licensee designates a resident of Bulloch County who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license (i.e., a "designee"). 
(b)  A licensee or designee shall not have been convicted of a felony or have been convicted of any violations of the laws of this state, or any other state, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages within five years of the date of the application. 
(c)  A licensee or designee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(d)  A licensee shall be the owner of the premises to be licensed or the holder of a lease thereon for substantially the same period to be covered by the license. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, or farm winery as defined in this chapter. 
(f)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer must also hold either a retail license for package sales or a retail license for consumption on the premises for the same category of alcoholic beverages included in the alcoholic beverage caterer license. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04; Amd. of 8-1-06(1)) 
Sec. 3-30. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Application for a license for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the county shall be filed with the county clerk upon forms prescribed by the county. The application shall be subscribed by the applicant under oath and fully completed and executed. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant and any potential designee shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation which shall search the files and forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation to determine past criminal activity. If the named licensee appoints any successor designee, the successor designee shall immediately furnish a complete set of fingerprints for compliance with this subsection. The successor designee may serve in that capacity unless and until he fails to meet the requirements of this chapter as a result of the investigation conducted pursuant to this subsection or for any other reason. 
(c)  Failure to fully complete and execute an application for a license or to furnish accurately all data, information and records required by the application form as well as failure to accompany the application with the payment of the prescribed fee shall be deemed just cause for denying the application with prejudice. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-31. - Renewal. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licensees shall be required to apply with the county clerk for renewal of their licenses annually on or before November 1 on forms prescribed by the county clerk and must comply with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any licensee making proper application, with all supporting documents, for a license to operate during the following calendar year and having filed the application prior to November 1 shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval or disapproval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval or disapproval is not granted prior to January 1. 
(c)  Any licensee making proper application, with all supporting documents, for a license to operate during the following calendar year and having filed the application on or after November 1 but prior to January 1 shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval or disapproval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval or disapproval is not granted prior to January 1; provided, however, that in addition to the application fee such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable late fee in an amount as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(d)  Any licensee who does not make proper application, with all supporting documents, prior to January 1 of the calendar year for which application for the license renewal is being made, shall cease and desist from the sale of alcoholic beverages as of January 1 unless a temporary permit is granted by the board of commissioners. A temporary permit may be issued by the board of commissioners if, in their sole judgment and discretion, the denial of a temporary permit would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business. A temporary permit may be issued by the board of commissioners for an initial 90-day period, with one 90-day extension allowed if needed. The licensee shall pay a fee for the temporary permit and any extension thereof as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. A temporary permit may be revoked, with or without cause, by the board of commissioners at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary permit shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. As a prerequisite to the issuance of a temporary permit, the licensee shall be required to file with the clerk of the board a proper application, with all supporting documents, for a license to operate during the applicable calendar year. In addition to the application fee, the application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable late fee in an amount as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04) 
Sec. 3-32. - Transfer. 
A license shall be retained for each sales location and shall not be transferable from one location to another or from one person to another, except with the express approval of the board after written application for the transfer and the payment of a transfer fee. Provided, however, that in the case of the death of a named licensee, such license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the board determines it would otherwise violate this chapter; and provided further that if such transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time comes to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. Licensees seeking to transfer a license from one location to another should consult the zoning administrator to assure that the proposed new location will be in compliance with zoning laws prior to applying for a transfer of the license. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-33. - Change in business ownership. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the board and surrender the license. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-34. - Suspension/revocation. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation for cause of the license by the board. 
(b)  The board, by resolution, may direct the sheriff of the county and his lawful deputies to remove the license from any place of business of any licensee upon a determination by the sheriff or his deputies that any provision of this chapter, or the laws of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages, has been violated. Upon removal of the license as provided above, it shall be illegal for the licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages until such time as the license has been reinstated as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Upon removal of a license, the board shall give written notice within three days to the licensee of the reasons for the removal, as well as notice of any suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee may, within ten days from receipt of the notice from the board, make written application to the board for a hearing on the matter of suspension or revocation, including the right of the licensee to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the allowed period shall constitute a waiver of any right of further appeal of the board's decision regarding revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested as provided above, the same will be held within ten days from receipt of the request by the board. The board, after hearing evidence, shall reach its decision and advise the licensee of the same. If the board determines, with or without a hearing, that a license shall be reinstated, the license shall be returned to the licensee on the effective date of the reinstatement as determined by the board. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-35. - Special event permits. 
(a)  A special event permit may be issued for the furnishing or dispensing of alcoholic beverages at a particular event on a temporary basis. A local special event permit pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be required whenever a state special events use permit is required by the Georgia Department of Revenue pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-14-1 and Ga. Comp. R. and Regs. § 560-2-2-.35; provided, however, that the following additional conditions and restrictions shall apply to the issuance of a local special event permit: 
(1)  A local special event permit may only be issued for one of the following types of events: 
a.  An event sponsored and held by a nonprofit organization that has obtained tax-exempt status from the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and at which event alcohol may be sold, furnished, or dispensed. A nonprofit organization must submit copies of its articles of incorporation, a certificate of existence from the secretary of state, by-laws, and tax-exempt certification from the IRS along with its application. Documents that satisfactorily demonstrate the existence and tax-exempt status of the nonprofit organization may be accepted even if the documents have slightly different designations from those listed above (e.g., "tax-exempt letter" instead of "tax-exempt certification"). 
b.  A closed private event to which the general public is not invited or admitted, and at which event alcohol may be furnished or dispensed but not sold. The applicant for a local special event permit for a closed private event must be an individual who meets all the qualifications of a licensee in subsections 3-29(a), (b), and (c), except that such individual shall not be required to be a resident of Bulloch County. As a prerequisite to issuance of the permit, the applicant must furnish a complete set of fingerprints at the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department for a criminal background check. In order to avoid any subterfuge for violating the prohibition against selling alcohol at a closed private event, neither the applicant nor anyone on his or her behalf shall be allowed to accept any payments from attendees, including but not limited to the following: (i) payments to gain entrance to the event, whether through advanced ticket sales or cover charges at the door; (ii) payments for food or anything else of value; (iii) payments for raffle tickets; or (iv) any other payments related to the event, whether made before, during, or after the event. 
(2)  An event for which a local special event permit is issued shall not last longer than one day, and the specific hours during which the event is to be held shall be stated on the permit application. 
(3)  The application for a local special event permit must be submitted to the county clerk at least four weeks prior to the event upon forms prescribed by the county. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. No additional charge shall be required for issuance of the local special event permit, if approved. 
(4)  An application for a local special event permit must be approved by the board of commissioners prior to issuance of the permit. 
(Amd. of 2-3-15) 
Sec. 3-36. - Training. 
(a)  A licensee and designee, if any, must complete the training required by this section and obtain certification of same no later than 90 days after the issuance or renewal of the license. This shall be an annual requirement, and the licensee and designee must complete the training and provide certification of same each time the license is renewed, even if they have completed the training in previous years. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the required training shall be the training intervention procedures (TIPs) program offered by the Bulloch County Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council, Inc. 
(c)  Failure of the licensee and designee, if any, to complete the required training and provide certification of same to the county clerk within 90 days after issuance or renewal of the license shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the procedures in section 3-34. 
(Amd. of 2-3-15) 
Secs. 3-37—3-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCATION 

Sec. 3-56. - Sale/service in public places. 
It shall be unlawful to furnish or dispense alcoholic beverages through kegs, barrels, cylinders or other portable receptacles containing tap or pump-type devices, in which the flow of contents is controlled by the operator, in a public street or in any public or semipublic parking facility or in the common area of an apartment, condominium or multifamily residential building. It shall further be unlawful to furnish or dispense alcoholic beverages using vehicles containing tap or pump-type devices. The term "semipublic parking facility" shall include any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building or multiple-family residential facility. When receptacles are found in violation of this section and the person maintaining the receptacle cannot be identified, the receptacle shall be confiscated and held for 30 days by the sheriff of the county. The receptacle may be claimed by the owner or lessor, but will be disposed of at the end of 30 days if unclaimed. Nothing in this section shall prohibit persons holding licenses pursuant to this article from dispensing through kegs, barrels, cylinders or other such receptacles inside the establishments or premises approved by the board for a pouring license. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-57. - Proximity restrictions. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, church or college campus. This subparagraph shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subparagraph apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application; 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This paragraph shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
(1)  Hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding July 1, 1981. 
(2)  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own homes, subject to licensing under state law. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-58. - Sales at locations other than licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages at locations other than the licensed premises unless: 
(1)  Such person has an alcoholic beverage caterer license and the alcoholic beverages are distributed or sold at an authorized catered function; or 
(2)  The alcoholic beverages are distributed or sold in compliance with the requirements of section 3-35 at an event authorized by local and state special event permits. 
(Amd. of 12-21-04; Amd. of 2-4-15) 
Secs. 3-59—3-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALES 

Sec. 3-81. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-82. - Rentals paid restricted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business's sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, such as a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-83. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-84. - Retention of records. 
(a)  All consumption-on-the-premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times during normal business hours be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years, provided that the board may authorize the disposal of records prior to the expiration of three years if the maintenance of such records is no longer required by the county. 
(b)  All consumption-on-the-premises licensees shall file with the county clerk the following reports at the time and in the form prescribed by the board: 
(1)  Monthly on-premises consumption report; 
(2)  Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the board. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a farm winery licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 8-1-06(1); Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-85. - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages on the relevant provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-86. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under sections 40-5-100 through 40-5-104 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate or school I.D. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in licensed premises if such employment is lawful. 
(e)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (c) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-87. - Days of sales prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  The wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place is unlawful during such hours that the polls are open. 
(c)  Sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Package sales of beer and wine for off-premises consumption shall be permitted on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(d)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 11-15-11; Amd. of 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-88. - Sales to intoxicated persons; gambling; disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game or any device not otherwise prohibited by law, including but not limited to any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine and its noncash redemption as defined and permitted as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-1(2)(A), (B) and 16-12-35(a)—(i). 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-89. - Container, storage, illumination. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the county shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(c)  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-90. - Cleanliness of premises; inspections. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Secs. 3-91—3-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES TO AND BY UNDERAGED PERSONS 

Sec. 3-111. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption-on-the-premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage caterer licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 21 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, handle, or transport alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in grocery stores, convenience stores, or similar establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04) 
Secs. 3-112—3-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BREAKING PACKAGE OR DRINKING ON PREMISES 

Sec. 3-136. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. In each retail sales location and place of business, when so restricted, there shall be permanently posted and clearly visible to customers, at least two notices in letters at least two inches high, the following language: 
NOTICE: UNLAWFUL TO OPEN MALT BEVERAGES OR WINE CONTAINERS ON  PREMISES 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Secs. 3-137—3-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 3-156. - Eligibility restricted. 
With the exception of a farm winery license, any type consumption-on-the-premises license may be granted only to a restaurant as defined under section 3-157 and a private club as defined under section 3-158. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 8-1-06(1)) 
Sec. 3-157. - Same—Restaurant. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring consumption on the premises license, a restaurant shall: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4)  Have a valid Bulloch County Health Department Food Service Permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc. required for food service establishments; 
(5)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared and consumed on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as food or beverage sales; 
(6)  Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 25 persons. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-158. - Private club. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a pouring or consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a) (4) of this section, a "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bill under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Private clubs licensed under the provisions of section 3-158 shall be required to maintain the same percentage sale of food/non-alcoholic beverages as compared to alcoholic beverages as is required of restaurants in section 3-157(a)(5). 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-159. - Ratio of alcoholic/non-alcoholic sales. 
Should the total sales from food and non-alcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not equal or exceed those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the board subject to the right for a hearing as provided for in section 3-35. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a farm winery licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 8-1-06(1)) 
Sec. 3-160. - Statement of sales. 
In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 3-84 the board may require that a licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-161. - Illumination of premises, location of sales restricted. 
(a)  All restaurants including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant is located on the premises; 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-162. - Hours of sale. 
Consumption on the premises licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday, with the premises being vacated no later than 1:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday and no later than 12:00 midnight on Saturday and Sunday. Package sales of beer and wine for off-premises consumption shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 11-15-11; Amd. of 3-20-12) 
Sec. 3-163. - Dancing on premises. 
Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-164. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage on any public street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the county, or upon or within any motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks, parks, and public places of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-165. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages, whether or not in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 12-21-04) 
Sec. 3-166. - Sexually oriented entertainment. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, stage, arrange or permit upon premises on which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed the following: 
(1)  Any live performance which constitutes or simulates: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or the displaying of any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  The use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (1) of this section. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit performances in mainstream performance establishments, museums or theaters. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-167. - Brown bagging. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other commercial establishment to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages, which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging." 
(Amd. of 12-21-04) 
Secs. 3-168—3-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAX ON MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 3-191. - Imposition. 
There is imposed upon the sale of mixed drinks in the county a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the mixed drinks to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said taxes; provided that said tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-192. - Collection. 
Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of mixed drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the board to facilitate the collection of the tax. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the mixed drink to the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-193. - Payment to county. 
(a)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the county not later than the tenth day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the tenth day of each month, a return shall be filed with the county clerk for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the board may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of mixed drinks and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Secs. 3-194—3-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WHOLESALE LICENSES, EXCISE TAX ON MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 3-216. - Required issuance. 
(a)  Non-resident wholesaler. Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the State of Georgia and who does not have a place of business in the unincorporated area of the county, but which has otherwise established a trade nexus within the unincorporated area of the county, shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the unincorporated area of the county upon application for such license to the county clerk, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that they understand the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the county and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the unincorporated area of the county shall pay a registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(b)  Resident wholesaler. Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the unincorporated area of the county shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98; Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-217. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  There is imposed by the county an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the county, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the county an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the county at a rate of $.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the county an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the county at the rate of $.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the county. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Sec. 3-218. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)  If the county has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the county by a licensee is not proper, the county may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)  The county shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-219. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the county shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the county. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by section 3-218. 
(b)  If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or the intent to evade this article, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-220. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the county within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay, in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of one percent month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-221. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the county may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the county, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the county approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Sec. 3-222. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The county clerk or her designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Every licensee engaging in the wholesale distribution of alcoholic beverages shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the county. 
(c)  The county may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcoholic beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(d)  In the administration of the provisions of this article, the county may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Amd. of 2-21-12) 
Secs. 3-223—3-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 3-240. - Penalties. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder and shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 8-18-98) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A 1989 amendment to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25 provides for the statewide implementation of various standard building codes after October 1, 1991. The editor has treated Amd. of April 5, 2005(1) as repealing chapter 4, sections 4-26—4-28, 4-41—4-58, 4-76—4-82, in its entirety and replacing it with a new chapter 4, sections 4-1, 4-26—4-28, 4-42—4-54, 4-76—4-82. Former chapter 4 pertained to similar material and derived from Res. of March 17, 1976(2), §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 1989-19, 11-21-89; Ord. No. 1989-19, exhibit A, §§ 1—12, 14, adopted Nov. 21, 1989; Ord. of May 5, 1991, §§ 1—7; Ord. of April 5, 1994; Ord. of July 6, 1999. 
Cross reference— County manager, § 2-66 et seq.; development authority, § 2-106 et seq.; cable television, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; manufactured homes, Ch. 9; signs, Ch. 11; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
Conventional construction: A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site and meets the following development standards: 
(1)  The pitch of the dwelling unit's roof has a minimum vertical rise of two feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, except that any such dwelling unit for which a building permit was applied prior to the original adoption of the zoning ordinance (November 4, 1994) may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this chapter with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. Galvanized metal roofs allowed in Ag-5, commercial, MHP districts only. 
(2)  The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, aluminum (vinyl-covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(3)  A curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of materials manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the building inspector is installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. 
Industrialized building: A structure manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of the state department of community affairs issued pursuant thereto. The use of the structure shall be consistent with the state department of community affairs application for the industrialized building. A change in use from the existing use approved by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs shall be reviewed, approved and inspected by the state department of community affairs in accordance with their certification of existing industrialized buildings requirements. State approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner, and meeting the following standards: 
(1)  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of two feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, except that any such home for which a building permit was applied prior to the adoption of the original zoning ordinance (November 4, 1994) may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this chapter with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. Galvanized metal roofs allowed in Ag-5, commercial, MHP districts only. 
(2)  The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or aluminum (vinyl-covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(3)  The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation. Neither a curtain wall nor skirting is sufficient to satisfy this requirement. 
(4)  Skirting, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of materials manufactured for such purposes, including brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the building inspector is installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. 
(5)  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1); Amd. of 4-6-10) 
Secs. 4-2—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-26. - State minimum standard codes. 
Bulloch County shall enforce the "state minimum standard codes" as defined in Section 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)-(VIII) and as authorized by Section 8-2-25(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as well as the current International Existing Building Code. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-27. - Conflicting provisions. 
Any matters in the state minimum standard codes that are contrary to existing ordinances of the county shall prevail. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-28. - References to officials. 
Within the state minimum standard codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the county who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the reasonable official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code are concerned. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Secs. 4-29—4-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING AND RELATED CODES ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 4-42. - Scope. 
This division provides for matters concerning, affecting or relating to the state minimum standard codes except insofar as such matters are otherwise provided in the body of the codes and as provided in other statutes or ordinances consistent herewith, or in rules duly promulgated under the provisions of this division. Where any requirement of this division is less restrictive than the state minimum standard code, then the latter shall take precedence over the requirement of this division. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-43. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide minimum standards and/or regulations to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-44. - Applicability. 
(a)  No construction equipment, appliances or systems, as hereinafter specified in this division, shall be installed, constructed, erected, altered or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  No construction equipment, appliances or systems, as hereinafter specified in this division, shall be altered in any manner that would be in violation of the provisions of this division or of any authorized rules or approval of the building official made and issued thereunder. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to the installation, alterations or repair of plumbing, air conditioning and heating, gas or electrical services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of the system owned or operated by a public service corporation or the water, electric or gas department of any such city or county in this state, in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing, air conditioning and heating, gas or electrical system, where such work is an integral part of the system owned or operated in rendering its duly authorized service as such, by a railroad company, pipeline company, mining company, public utility in the exercise of its normal functions as a public utility, or where such work is an integral part of any irrigation system on farms, ranches, or other open, unpopulated areas where such work will not be located within 30 feet of any dwelling or any building devoted to animal husbandry. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-45. - Conflicts. 
In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this division and any provisions of the state minimum standard codes, the provisions of the standard codes shall control. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-46. - Liability. 
Neither the county, the building official, nor any other official or employee of the county shall be deemed to have waived any immunity or assumed any liability for damages to persons or property as a result of the administration and enforcement of this division or any other pertinent law or ordinance. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-47. - Use and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain, use, repair or alter any buildings, equipment, appliances or systems that has been or will be installed, constructed or erected that is in violation or will violate the provisions as hereinafter specified. 
(b)  No buildings, equipment, appliances or systems, as hereinafter specified in this division, shall be used unless it is in a safe condition. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-48. - Equipment, appliances or systems affected. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to any buildings, equipment, appliances or systems installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained or used in the county, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-49. - Building officer. 
(a)  Creation, duties. There shall be a building official who shall receive applications required by this division, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. The official shall examine the buildings, equipment, appliances or systems for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of the law and this division are met. The official shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal demolition, use, location, and maintenance of buildings, equipment, appliances or systems, except as may be otherwise provided in other ordinances or regulatory measures. The official shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the county so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this division and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with the law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguards, the official shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  Inspections required under the provisions of this division shall be made by the building official or his duly authorized representative. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the official may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in the county to perform any duty imposed upon him by this division. The building official or his authorized representative(s) are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this division and issuing copies of charges and prosecution of any person or persons as may be charged with any violations of this or other ordinances of the county. 
(2)  All installations of any equipment, appliance or system for which a permit has been issued as prescribed in this division shall be subject to inspection by the building official or his duly authorized representative(s). 
(c)  Records. 
(1)  The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. This official shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to equipment, appliances or systems for which a permit has been issued for a period of not less than two years after final inspection. 
(2)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons during office hours observed by the county but shall not be removed from the office of the building official. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-50. - Application for permit. 
(a)  When required. 
(1)  Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the International Residential Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(2)  An existing use which is altered or extended must meet applicable county building codes and development regulations. When an applicant seeks a building permit for the extension or alteration of an existing use, the building official will inspect the use and determine what (if anything) is needed to bring the use into conformance with the applicable building codes and development regulations before a building permit may be issued. 
(3)  Work exempt from a permit includes those items listed in the administration section of the International Residential Code. 
(b)  Review by health department. 
(1)  The county health department shall review all on-site sewage management system permit applications for new constructions or substantial improvements to existing constructions to determine whether proposed building sites will be suitable for the placement of on-site sewage management systems. 
(2)  The county health department shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to ensure that adequate area is available for the construction and repair of on-site sewage management systems and state mandated setback requirements be fulfilled. 
(3)  The county health department shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewerage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood-waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  After study of the site of a proposed use, the health department may require for health reasons that all or any portion of the site not be used for the intended purpose. The health department may also set a minimum lot size larger than that required by this chapter. The county health department will either approve or disapprove the sewer facilities within 30 days of receipt of the application from the building official and provide a written decision, including reasons for the decision. 
(c)  Application form, contents. 
(1)  An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building official may prescribe. 
(2)  The application shall be made by the owner or his authorized representative, and it shall be the responsibility of the owner to see that a permit is obtained before any installation or work is started. 
(3)  The application shall contain the full names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner. 
(4)  The application shall describe briefly the proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required by the building official for an intelligent understanding of the work. 
(5)  Any contractor, other than the owner who will perform work which is the object of a building permit, shall present his state license to the building official before the permit shall be issued. 
(6)  No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances. If an applicant for a building permit is, at the time of such an application, determined to be in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, then the building official will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant voluntarily removes or changes the cause of the violation and ceases to be in violation. The applicant must notify the building official that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release as to the violation. When the applicant has ceased to be in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, the building official will then accept the application for building permit. 
(d)  Plans and specifications. 
(1)  When required by the building officer, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany every application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain the name and address of the designer and information in the form of notes or otherwise as to the quality and type of materials where quality is essential to conformity with this division. Such information shall be specific, and this division shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. 
(2)  The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction and basis of calculations. They shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design and design professional seal (Georgia registered). 
(3)  If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement must be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; must use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and must use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(e)  Special historic buildings and districts. The provisions of this division relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-50.1. - Wetlands protection. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(3)  Wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service national wetlands inventory maps for the county. 
(4)  Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the county as indicated on the wetlands map. Provided, however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this section does not relieve the land owner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(b)  A U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for any regulated activity within the wetland protection district. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required no permit for the regulated activity will be issued until the Corps has issued the section 404 permit or letter of permission. If the Corps determines that there are no wetlands present on the proposed development site, the county may proceed with its normal permitting procedures. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-51. - Permits. 
(a)  Action on application. 
(1)  The building official is in charge of issuing building permits. The building permit will be issued if, upon review of the application, the building official is satisfied that the proposed project can meet the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances. The building official may require the submission of additional information in order to determine if the proposed project meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Applications for permits under this division shall be examined within five working days after filing. If, after examination, no objection is found to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the application shall be approved and a permit issued for the proposed work. If the building official determines that the proposed project as presented in the building permit application will not satisfy the requirements of this chapter, he/she will not issue a building permit. He/she will notify the applicant in writing within ten days of the submission of the application, stating reasons for the refusal. The applicant will then need to confer with the building official to determine what he/she needs to do in order to comply with the ordinance and be eligible for a building permit. 
(3)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this division. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this division shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(4)  The issuance of a permit based on applications, plans and/or specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the applications, plans and/or specifications or from preventing the work from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this division or of other ordinances of the county. 
(5)  The building official shall maintain a permanent record of the permit application and issuance thereof, which record shall indicate the name of the professional engineer or architect, if any, that has sealed the plans, specifications, plats or reports pursuant to which the building permit is issued. Such record shall include details on the size, type of building or structure, use for the building or structure and estimated cost of construction. 
(b)  Fees. The schedule of fees and charges, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, shall control the fees to be charged for permits to be issued pursuant to this division. Failure to obtain the permit as provided herein shall result in the fee being doubled. 
(c)  Conditions of permit. 
(1)  All work performed under a permit issued shall conform to the approved application and plans and all codes or ordinances governing the work or equipment for which permits were issued. All work shall be performed by an individual contractor, firm or corporation licensed to perform such work except when performed by an individual installing, altering or repairing plumbing, plumbing fixtures, air conditioning and heating, air conditioning and heating fixtures, or electrical services in a single family dwelling owned and occupied by him. 
(2)  Individuals, contractors, firms or corporations licensed to perform work governed by this division shall register their license number with the building official before obtaining permits. 
(3)  Temporary signs shall be permitted on a parcel as long as the parcel has an active building permit and shall be removed when a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(d)  Expiration. A permit under which no work is commenced within six months after issuance, or where the work commenced is suspended or abandoned for six months, shall expire by limitation and fees paid shall be forfeited. The application, plans and specifications shall be reviewed and a new permit required before work is started or resumed. 
(e)  Revocation. The building official may revoke any building permit where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact or condition in the application or plans on which the permit was based, and upon such revocation, all construction, improvements or alterations as authorized by such permit or approval, shall cease until a valid building permit is issued. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1); Amd. of 4-5-11(1)) 
Sec. 4-52. - Inspections. 
(a)  The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections of buildings and such other inspections as may be necessary, and shall either approve the portion of construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violation of compliance with this division: 
(1)  Foundation inspection/temporary power: To be made after trenches for footings are excavated and all forms and required reinforcement materials erected. Temporary electric service should also be erected. 
(2)  Slab house: open plumbing - roughed-in plumbing tests on waste lines and water lines and open cell foundation walls with reinforcement. 
(3)  Sub-floor house: foundation walls, bond beam/open cell prior to placement of concrete. 
(4)  Pre-slab: moisture barrier placement and thickness of slab. 
(5)  Sub-floor: foundation walls, bond beam/cells filled with concrete and anchor bolt placement. 
(6)  Sub-floor: open framing to verify spans, anchoring and termite protection. 
(7)  Exterior sheathing: verify nailing patterns, sheathing placement and overlaps and purlins as required. 
(8)  Dry-in inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place. Plumbing, electrical and mechanical systems are to be roughed-in, including all pipes and concealed wiring. Chimney ducts and vents are complete. 
(9)  Insulation inspection: Inspection shall be made to determine compliance with the energy efficiency chapter of the International Building Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
(10)  Permanent power inspection: Inspection shall be made to determine compliance with the National Electric Code. Upon compliance with the National Electric Code, the building department will fax to the appropriate power company an approval to connect power to the building. 
(11)  Certificate of occupancy inspection: 
a.  Certificate of occupancy is required before a structure for which a building permit has been issued may be occupied or used. The certificate of occupancy must be signed by the zoning administrator and building official and attest that to the best of his / her knowledge all requirements of this chapter have been met. The owner/contractor will then receive the certificate of occupancy to be used as confirmation that he/she has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  The building official will issue the certificate of occupancy once all applicable building codes and other uniform development standards and ordinances have been met. However, if the building official finds that all requirements of such ordinances have not yet been met when the owner/contractor seeks a certificate of occupancy, the building official will not issue the certificate of occupancy. The building official will notify the owner/contractor within ten days, stating reasons for the refusal. The owner/contractor will then need to confer with the building official to determine what he/she needs to do in order to comply with the ordinance and be eligible for a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Work shall not be done on any part of a building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. Such approval shall be given only after inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
(c)  To the extent possible, the building official shall schedule and make the required inspection within 48 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and county-observed holidays. Upon receipt of notification of a required inspection, the building official will schedule the date and time for the inspection. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-53. - General safety and aesthetic standards. 
(a)  All habitable building and structures shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Responsibility. The owner and/or occupant of the property shall maintain all structures and properties in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which does not comply with the requirements of these standards. 
(2)  Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, roads, streets and similar areas on private property shall be kept in proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(3)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans for blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. Exception: Legitimate agricultural activities. 
(4)  Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition that it does not threaten the integrity of the structure. 
(5)  Exterior walls. The exterior shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(6)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portions of the structure. The roof shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(7)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposing loads. 
(8)  Windows, doors, and frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. Every bedroom shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(9)  Plumbing facilities and fixtures. The owner of the occupied structure or a designated agent shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with the current state minimum code. A person shall not occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with these standards. 
(10)  Sanitary facilities. Every residential unit shall contain a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
(b)  Unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. 
(1)  Buildings, systems, appliances or equipment covered by this division that may be or shall be found upon inspection to have become dangerous or unsafe, shall, unless made safe and so certified by the building official, be removed or the use of the same discontinued. 
(2)  The term "dangerous or unsafe buildings, systems, appliances or equipment" shall include buildings, systems, appliances or equipment structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; or otherwise dangerous to life or property. 
(c)  Notice. 
(1)  Upon receipt of information that buildings, systems, appliances or pieces of equipment covered by this division are unsafe, the building official shall make or cause to be made an inspection; and if it is found that an unsafe condition exists, he shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or someone of the owner's, executor's, administrator's, agent's or lessee's employ, or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the systems, appliances or equipment are unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe, as may be deemed necessary by the building official. 
(2)  If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found after a diligent search, such notice and order shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. The mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice. 
(d)  Disregard of notice. If the person served with a notice or order to remove existing unsafe conditions from buildings, systems, appliances or equipment or discontinue the use of same fails within a reasonable time as set by the building official to comply with the requirements thereof, the building official shall advise the county or the proper prosecuting authority of all the facts in the case, and shall institute an appropriate action in the courts to compel compliance. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-54. - Violations. 
(a)  Stop work order. Whenever in the opinion of the building official by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this division, the official shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who shall violate a provision of this division or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(2)  The owner of a building, structure or premises, where anything in violation of this division shall be placed or shall exist, and an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
(c)  Abatement. The imposition of the penalties herein shall not preclude the attorney for the county from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the use of any equipment, appliance or system covered by this division. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Secs. 4-55—4-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING 

Sec. 4-76. - Findings. 
The county commission has determined that the adequate provisions of public services to the residents of the county, and to other public bodies, including such services as police, fire and emergency medical services, requires the establishment of a uniform road naming and numbering system for buildings and property located within the county. The county commission further feels that the article enacted herein will secure the public safety and deliver the aforementioned public services in a more efficient and effective manner. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-77. - Preamble. 
There is hereby established a uniform system for road naming and for numbering property and buildings on all roads, streets and public ways within the county. All buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-78. - Road names. 
(a)  The county GIS division shall establish and assign names for all streets, roads and public ways within the county. 
(b)  No new road name assigned by the county GIS division shall be a duplicate of or be similar to (either phonetically or by spelling) any existing street name within the county. 
(c)  Existing duplicate road names shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the enhanced 911 system in the county, as determined in the judgment of the county commission. 
(d)  Historical names shall be the prime consideration in the assignment of road names. Additionally, no two part names shall be considered for a road name, per NENA standards, unless there is a significant history behind the name. 
(e)  As many segmental roads as possible shall be identified as being a continuous road, thereby eliminating as many road identifying names and numbers as possible. It is recommended that any road serving two or more structures, which may be occupied, should be named and numbered. This will apply both to public and private roads, drives, alleys, and service roads. Each named road within the county should bear a road name sign, whether private or public. 
(f)  The county paved roads and historical roads, whether paved or unpaved, shall be named, and as funds are available the names shall be posted. Road naming within subdivisions shall comply with the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations and in addition be approved by the Bulloch County GIS Division prior to the final subdivision plat being approved and recorded in the office of clerk of superior court of the county. Furthermore, certain roads of historical significance, shall be named and bear the same name and number throughout. 
(g)  Upon receipt of a petition in the form and format as specified by the board of commissioners seeking a change of name of an existing named road containing the signatures of the owners or their representatives as specified below of not less than 75 percent of the parcels of property abutting said public road, the board of commissioners shall take under consideration but be under no compulsion to grant said request. At its discretion, the board of commissioners may, but shall not be required to, prior to deciding the issue of the proposed name change, hold a public hearing on the issue. 
(1)  The owner of the abutting property shall be deemed to be the person or entity returning the property for ad valorem taxes in the office of the county tax commissioner. 
a.  If the property is returned in the name of an estate or trust, the legal representative of the estate or trust must sign the petition. 
b.  If the property is returned in the name of a corporation, a corporate officer must sign the petition on behalf of the corporation. 
c.  If the property is returned in the name of a partnership, each partner must sign the petition unless the signing partner has written authorization to sign for all other partners. 
d.  If, according to the records in the tax commissioner's office, more than one natural person has a life or fee interest in said property, each such interest holder must sign the petition unless the signing interest holder has written permission to sign for the non-signing interest holders. 
e.  After receiving the 75 percent of all land owners signatures, a certified letter will be sent, at petitioner's expense, to verify all signatures on the petition. 
(2)  The determination by the board of commissioners as to the authority of the person signing the petition and the number of parcels abutting the road shall be final. 
(h)  In the event there is a dispute as to the proper name of an existing road or a dispute as to whether an existing road has been previously officially named, the county commission, in its absolute discretion, shall assign a name to the road under the same procedure for the naming of a new road. The decision by the county commissioners as to the name assigned to such road shall be final. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-79. - Numbering. 
(a)  The county commission shall establish a new address numbering system, using NENA standards, which shall be administered by the county GIS division. 
(b)  Any structure with a continuous roofline, which has power connected and/or can possibly be occupied, shall be assigned a separate number. A number or alphabetical letter shall be assigned for each separate and distinct occupant or division (i.e. apartment, company, etc.) within a building or other occupied structure. Furthermore, no temporary or aesthetic addresses will be assigned for any structures or bare properties in the county. 
(c)  Existing numbers shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the enhanced 911 system in the county, as determined in the judgment of the county GIS division. 
(d)  All new buildings and structures must be assigned a number address by the county GIS division prior to the granting of a building permit. All subdivision plats must also be submitted to the county zoning division before any 911 addresses will be assigned. 
(e)  Written notification of the address assigned under the terms of this article to each house, building or structure shall be given or delivered to its respective owner. 
(f)  Written notification of the address assigned under the terms of this article to each house, building or structure shall also be given to the appropriate post office of the United States Postal Service. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-80. - Placement of assigned numbers. 
(a)  Except as set forth in sections section 4-81 and section 4-82 herein, the owner, occupant or agent of each house, building or other structure assigned a number under the uniform numbering system provided in this article shall place or cause to be placed such number on the house, building or other structure within 30 days after receiving notification of the number assignment. 
(b)  Any number aside from the assigned number shall be removed from the structure, mailbox, post or stanchion, to prevent confusion with the number assigned in conformance with this chapter. No person, agency, or business shall adopt, assign, display or cite any number other than that assigned by the county GIS division. 
(c)  Cost and installation of the numbers shall be paid for by the property owner, occupant or agent of each house, building or other structure. 
(d)  Residential numbers shall not be less than three inches in height. Business numbers shall not be less than four inches in height. Any structure containing multiple units (i.e. apartment complex, or multiple businesses in one unit) must display the assigned number or alphabetical letter assigned in the same manner as a business. All numbers shall be made of a durable, clearly visible material and shall contrast with the color of the house, building or other structure. 
(e)  All numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the appropriate door so that the number is clearly visible from the street. In cases where the building is situated more than 50 feet from the street, the building number shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to the building, or upon the mailbox, gatepost, fence or other appropriate place so as to be clearly visible from the street. 
(f)  In the instance that a building or dwelling or any other property described in this article that requires numbering under this article, is not visible from the road or street for which it is located, the property number shall be posted in close proximity to the driveway for the property. The address assigned must also be placed on the structure itself as well as the driveway entrance. The numbers must be displayed in an appropriate place which is visible easily during the day or at night from the road or street. "An appropriate place" includes mailboxes, fences, curbs, gate posts, and double-faced signs that are perpendicular to the road. 
(g)  In addition to, but not in lieu of, the required placements of assigned numbers, the owner, occupant, or agent of a residential structure may place or cause to be placed the assigned number on the driveway of the structure with reflective numbering in close proximity to the public right-of-way as an additional method to assist emergency services in locating the residence. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1); Amd. of 4-6-10; Amd. of 12-20-16) 
Sec. 4-81. - Administration and implementation. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or other structure to be erected, repaired, altered or modified in the unincorporated areas of the county after the effective date of this article until the owner has obtained the assigned number from the county GIS division. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner to attach the assigned number to that house, building or other structure as provided herein. 
(c)  Final, approval of any house, building or other structure erected, repaired, altered or modified after the effective date of this article shall be withheld by the building inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been attached to the structure. 
(d)  The county manager shall be authorized to recommend written procedures and reasonable fees to the board of commissioners for the processing by the county of petitions requesting changing of road names or property numbers. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may, by resolution, set a fee for the application and processing of requests or petitions for road name changes or assignment of property numbers. 
(f)  As part of the new 911 implementation, all structures will be photographed and placed in the county 911 database and on the tax assessors website. In the event this may or will cause harm, the resident may request in writing to the county chief tax appraiser, that their information not be listed for public viewing. However, the photograph will remain with the 911 division for its duration. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Sec. 4-82. - Existing structures. 
The board of commissioners shall encourage owners of existing structures to post the assigned numbers to their structure in accordance herewith within 30 days from the effective date of this article. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(1); Amd. of 1-19-10(1)) 
Chapter 4.5 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4.5-1—4.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of March 5, 2002, § 1, amended the Code with the addition of a new chapter 11, pertaining to adult entertainment establishments. In order to maintain the alphabetical sequence of chapters, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as new chapter 4.5, article II, sections 4.5-21, 4.5-22, 4.5-24—4.5-56, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 4.5-21. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Augusta-Richmond County, Georgia; Indianapolis, Indiana; Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; Marietta, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Warner Robins, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; and Smyrna, Georgia; which experiences the board of commissioners believes are relevant to the issues faced by the county, the board of commissioners takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the board of commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood; increased expenditures for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described; and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or partially nude conduct in establishments affects the public welfare; and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-22. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Adult entertainment establishments. Under this article, the term adult entertainment establishment shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or 20 percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult business. Either: 
a.  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
b.  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult dancing establishment. A business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(5)  Adult hotel or motel. A hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  Adult video store. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(8)  Bath house or adult massage parlor. A business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  Erotic dance establishment. A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainment, where such performance are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(10)  Encounter center or rap establishment. Any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(11)  Escort bureau or introduction services. Any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(12)  Lingerie modeling studio. A business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
General definitions. 
(1)  Church. A body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same rituals and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
(2)  Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
(3)  Minor. For the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(4)  Person. An individual, association, club, society, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(5)  Premises. The building for which or upon which a license is issued hereunder and "premise" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this article. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premises for the purposes of this article. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
(6)  Specified anatomical areas. Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(7)  Specified sexual activities. Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or 
b.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual simulation, arousal or tumescence; 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
d.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region, buttocks or female breast; 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-23. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4.5-24. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 st of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the county clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer, a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on December 25th of each year or on Sunday. 
(g)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, malt beverages, wine, any other alcoholic beverage, or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(p)  All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(q)  All adult entertainment establishments shall permit representatives of the sheriff's department or any other county official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this article. 
(r)  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-25. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, public area, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(b)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in, or be allowed to engage in, any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(d)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24, no adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on or off the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, loiter for the purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-26. - License required—Automatic forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within unincorporated areas of the county any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article, without a license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-27. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-28. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-29. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-30. - Location and distance requirements. 
No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, college campus, governmental building, library, civic center, children's day care facility, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
(4)  Within any zoning district other than as a conditional use in either general commercial (GC) or highway commercial (HC). 
(5)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the nearest part of the premises of the establishment, as defined herein, to the closest property lines of the parcel of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-31. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person works on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the county sheriff's department of his/her intended employment on forms supplied by the sheriff's department that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. The sheriff's department shall have 15 days to investigate the information required of the prospective employee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the sheriff's department requires including fingerprinting by the sheriff's department and consent to an NCIC and/or GCIC records check. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the sheriff's department shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the sheriff for a hearing. The decision of the sheriff after hearing may be appealed to the county board of commissioners which will use the appeals procedure contained in this article. An investigation fee of $100.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the county clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the county, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of said license. Should any licensed employee of an adult entertainment establishment leave employment with said establishment for 60 or more days, that employee's license shall lapse automatically without any further action required. All adult entertainment establishments are required to notify the sheriff's department within five days of the termination, either voluntarily or otherwise, of any licensed employee of said adult entertainment establishments, giving the former employee's name, social security number, and date of termination. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-32. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee of $2,500.00 shall be paid to the county clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and regulation required by this article. The county clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-33. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name, and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last 30 days; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and if a corporation, all shareholders holding five percent or more of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of minor traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the sheriff's department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, directors, or any stockholders of five percent or more of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners, or any of the officers or stockholders controlling five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The county shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and current annual report filed with the state secretary of state; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A certified plat by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated in order to verify compliance with section 4.5-30 of this article. This provision may be waived if compliance can be readily determined. 
(21)  Such further information as may be required to review the applicant. 
(22)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-34. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, or a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the county clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the county clerk; and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-35. - Application; investigation. 
The county clerk shall refer the application to the sheriff's department for investigation. The sheriff's department shall have up to 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigative report by the sheriff's department is furnished to the county clerk, the county clerk shall place the application on the next board of commissioners' agenda at least five days but not later than 15 days after receipt of the report. The board of commissioners may grant the license at that meeting if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder controlling five percent or more of the corporation stock, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in Sec. 4.5-30 of this article. 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the county, state or the United States; 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-36. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes or special assessments duly imposed; 
(2)  Any person who is not of a good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent or more of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose officers, partners, or members are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-37. - License—Refusal; appeal. 
If the board of commissioners following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this article, the board of commissioners shall notify the county clerk of such opinion and, within ten days of such notice, the county clerk shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the county clerk of such denial. A hearing before the board of commissioners shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-38. - Same—Renewal. 
An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article as they exist at the time the renewal application is filed. Applicants have no vested right to the renewal of said license. The renewal fee of $500.00 for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments and enforcement of this article. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1st of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a calendar year period or for a remainder of a calendar year if issued after January 1st of any calendar year. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-39. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-40. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location application and fee of $500.00, has been deposited with the county clerk and approval has been obtained from the board of commissioners. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this article have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the adult entertainment establishment license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-41. - Appeal—Procedure. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by the county clerk, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five days nor more than 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-42. - Same—Board of commissioners determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on board of commissioners' agenda, the board of commissioners may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-43. - Board of commissioners' hearing. 
Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefore, the board of commissioners shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from county staff. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-44. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses an he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-45. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-46. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished to the county manager and the sheriff. 
(c)  The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners' meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-47. - Hearing officer report—Action by board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board of commissioners does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-48. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Every day that such violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation punishable as stated above. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-49. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-50. - Revocation and appeal. 
The sheriff shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the sheriff seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, he shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(1)  The sheriff shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
a.  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
b.  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
c.  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the county or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
d.  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; 
e.  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the county regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
f.  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation or business license or tax, fine or other amount of money due to the county under this article or any other taxing ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  In the event the sheriff shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the sheriff. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the appeal hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the sheriff, the sheriff shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
(3)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the sheriff, the applicant may appeal the decision of the sheriff to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal with the county clerk within ten days from the date of the decision of the sheriff. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled by the county clerk before the board of commissioners within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After the hearing by the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may take such action as it deems appropriate, including upholding of the action of the sheriff or the imposition of such action as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the board of commissioners shall be in the form of a writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days of the final action of the board of commissioners. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the sheriff, as provided herein, the decision of the sheriff shall be final. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-51. - Change of location. 
There is established an administrative fee of $15.00 to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-52. - Alcoholic beverages—Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under this article after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, or wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. Any licensee whose license was granted prior to the adoption of this article shall not be subject to this amendment until ten days after the effective date of this article, at which time all licensees within the unincorporated area of the county shall be subject to this provision, including those licensees licensed before the effective date hereof. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-53. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as of ten as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-54. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premise shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-55. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service of him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5-56. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 3-5-02, § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS, PAWNSHOPS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 4.5-57. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the term: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or articles containing any precious metal or gems from members of the general public for resale to brokers, dealers or melters. 
Electronic reporting system means a computer based system, as specified by the sheriff, which is designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Goods means every species of tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means any person (with the exception of title pawnbrokers), whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Pawnshop means any person (with the exception of title pawnbrokers), whether as owner, agent or employee engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity however organized. 
Secondhand dealer means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose principal business is that of purchasing, storing, selling, or exchanging, and receiving secondhand personal property of any kind or description. However, any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, whose principal business is the purchase and resale of clothing, furniture, or the resale of goods that are donated to the business as a charitable donation shall not be deemed a secondhand dealer under this article. 
Precious metals means gold, silver or platinum or any metal containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Title pawnbroker means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee, engaged exclusively in the business of lending money on the security of pledged titles to motor vehicles. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-58. - Purpose; legislative intent. 
It is hereby declared to be within the public welfare for Bulloch County to impede the sale of stolen property by requiring pawnbrokers, pawnshops, secondhand dealers, and dealers in precious metals and gems within the unincorporated area of the county to comply with all requirements of this regulatory ordinance including the requirement to electronically post timely information obtained from pledges and sellers in a format available to and usable by law enforcement agencies. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-59. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be punished upon conviction in the Magistrate Court of Bulloch County as provided in section 1-11. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-60. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems to engage in such business within the unincorporated area of the county without first obtaining a regulatory license pursuant to this article. If a person engages in more than one of these types of business, only one license and one license fee shall be required, but the license shall state the types of business for which the license is issued. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-61. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applicants for a license pursuant to this article shall file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, by the president or chief executive officer if a corporation, or by a person duly authorized to transact business on behalf of any other legal entity however organized, showing the following: 
(1)  The name and home address of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, and the capacity in which such person will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise; and 
(2)  The address of the fixed and permanent physical business location within the county where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-62. - Qualification for license. 
(a)  A licensee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  A licensee shall not have been convicted, within the five years preceding his application, of any felony, or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states and the United States. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing on first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation or program requirements. 
(c)  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years preceding his application, any license to operate as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems issued by any governmental entity. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-63. - License fee; issuance of the license. 
(a)  The applicant shall be required to pay a license fee as set forth in the county's schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Upon proper completion of the application and payment of the license fee, the clerk shall review the application and conduct such investigation as deemed necessary. After investigation, the clerk shall grant or deny the license. If the clerk denies the license, the reasons for the denial shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant via certified mail as notice of the denial of the license. 
(c)  If the clerk denies the license the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of the license to the board of commissioners by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk within 45 days of the clerk mailing notice of the denial of the license. 
(d)  Upon the applicant filing a timely notice of appeal, the clerk shall place the matter on the agenda for the next available meeting of the board of commissioners for a hearing. 
(e)  If the board of commissioners determines that the clerk abused her discretion in denying the applicant a license, the board of commissioners shall reverse the clerk's decision and grant the applicant a license. If the board of commissioners determines that the clerk did not abuse her discretion in denying the applicant a license, the board of commissioners shall affirm the decision of the clerk and sustain the denial of the applicant's license. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-64. - Posting of license. 
The license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. If the applicant desires to do business in more than one place within the unincorporated area of the county, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-65. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the Bulloch County Board of Commissioners after notice, hearing and a finding that by a preponderance of the evidence any of the following have occurred: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any business transaction carried out under the license granted by the article; 
(3)  Failure to maintain records as required in this article; 
(4)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this article in any unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the notice personally to the person in charge of the licensee's business, or by mailing the notice, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-66. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Bulloch County Sheriff's Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Sworn officers of the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department and civilian employees designated by the sheriff shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. 
These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and to locate goods that are missing or stolen. This article shall not limit the authority of any other Bulloch County officer or employee to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-67. - Records and information to be recorded. 
Every person or business engaged as a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems within the unincorporated area of the county shall secure from every person from whom he receives any goods, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and a social security or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face for each transaction, and if multiple transactions are made at different times of the same day a separate photo shall be taken. Each digital image shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption; 
(4)  A complete and accurate description of the goods acquired, and a digital photograph of the goods acquired including the following information, if available: 
a.  Brand name. 
b.  Model number. 
c.  Manufacturer's serial number. 
d.  Size. 
e.  Color, as apparent to the untrained eye. 
f.  Precious metal type, weight, and content if known. 
g.  Gemstone description, including the number of stones. 
h.  In the case of firearms, the type of action, caliber or gauge, number of barrels, barrel length, and finish. 
i.  Any other unique identifying marks, numbers, or letters. 
j.  The date and time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall maintain the above information and digital photographs for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(6)  The pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall require the seller to sign a statement verifying that the seller is the rightful owner of the goods or is entitled to sell, consign, or trade the goods. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-68. - Fixed physical location. 
No pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems or their employee(s) may operate except at a fixed permanent physical business location with an occupation tax certificate and a regulatory license issued pursuant to this article; no pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems or their employee(s) may operate as a peddler or transient merchant. Licenses acquired under this article are valid only for the location stated on the license and said license is not transferable from one location to another. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-69. - Report to sheriff; required format. 
Every pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems located within the unincorporated area of the county shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department, of all transactions that occurred during the 24-hour period ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made each day prior to 11:59 p.m. for each day the operator or dealer transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the sheriff's department. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the sheriff's department in lieu thereof. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-70. - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems, or agent or employee thereof to receive any article in pawn or purchase any article for resale from any person under 18 years of age. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-71. - Hold period; law enforcement holds. 
(a)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems who takes goods on pawn, taking full title thereto, shall hold the goods so taken in pawn for at least 30 days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(b)  Any pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems who buys goods, taking full title thereto shall hold the goods so taken in on purchase for at least five days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(c)  The Bulloch County Sheriff's Department or any other law enforcement agency has the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on law enforcement hold. In that event, the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department or other law enforcement agency shall notify the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems of the need for a law enforcement hold and identify all property subject to the law enforcement hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, or dealer in precious metals and gems to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from law enforcement hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-72. - Administrative inspection of goods and records. 
(a)  The county finds that pawnbrokers, pawnshops, secondhand dealers, and dealers in precious metals and gems are engaged in a business that is a pervasively regulated industry and that proper enforcement of this article requires the administrative inspection of the commercial property where these businesses are located. 
(b)  All goods pledged or sold to a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems as well as all records and documentation required to be kept by this article shall be subject to an administrative inspection by the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department as provided for in section 4.5-66. 
(c)  As such, every pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems shall admit to his premises, without a search warrant, any sheriff's officer, or designated civilian employee of the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department, whose duties include verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and locating goods that are missing or stolen. These administrative inspections shall occur during normal business hours unless consented to by the pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-73. - Compliance with state and federal law. 
Nothing in this article shall relieve a pawnbroker, pawnshop, secondhand dealer, and dealer in precious metals and gems from the necessity of complying with state and federal law. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Sec. 4.5-74. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the Bulloch County Board of Commissioners. The county clerk shall issue regulatory licenses pursuant to this article to all pawnshops, pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and dealers in precious metals and gems holding valid occupational tax certificates as of the date of adoption of this article. These licenses shall expire on the same date as the valid occupational tax certificate held by the pawnshop, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and dealer in precious metals and gems. Upon expiration of this license all pawnshops, pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and dealers in precious metals and gems shall be required to file a yearly application for a regulatory license as provided in this article. 
(Amd. of 4-16-13) 
Chapter 5 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Cable television franchise. 
The Bulloch County Community Antenna Television Company Special Privilege License Ordinance, being Ord. No. 1985-4 dated 3-5-85, is incorporated by reference and made a part of this Code as if fully recited herein. 
Secs. 5-2—5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of March 21, 2006, §§ 1.00—4.05, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article II, sections 5-21—5-24, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-21. - General. 
(a)  Definitions. Whenever used in this article, the following words and terms, as well as their singulars, plurals, and possessives, shall have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
Access channel: Any channel on a cable system set aside by the franchisee for non-commercial public, local educational, and/or local governmental use and provided as part of the basic tier of service. 
Affiliate: An individual, corporation, association, or partnership that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a franchisee. 
Applicant: Any person submitting an application within the meaning of this article. 
Application: Any proposal, submission or request to: 
(1)  Construct and operate a cable system within the county; 
(2)  Transfer a franchise or control of the franchisee; 
(3)  Renew a franchise; 
(4)  Modify a franchise; or 
(5)  Seek any other relief from the county pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement. 
An application includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as well as any and all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence. 
Cable act: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Public Law No. 98-549, as amended by the Cable System Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Public Law No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Public Law No. 104-104, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and as hereafter may be amended. 
Cable service or service: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Cable system: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable services which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the county. Such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201, et seq., except that such facility will be considered a cable system only to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; or 
(5)  An open video system that complies with the requirements of federal law. 
Cable franchise: A franchise granted subject to the provisions of this article to a franchisee authorizing the use and occupancy of rights-of-way for the provision of cable service. 
County: Bulloch County, Georgia. 
County requirements: All laws, rules, regulations, policies and directives of general application of the county, in effect at present or to be adopted in the future by the board of commissioners. 
Control of a franchise, franchisee or applicant: The legal or practical ability to exert control over the affairs of a franchisee or applicant, either directly or indirectly, whether by contractual agreement, majority ownership interest, any lesser ownership interest, or in any other manner. 
Emergency: A reasonably unforeseen situation presenting an imminent hazard to personal or public health or safety or to property, as determined by the county manager or his designee. 
Facilities: A system, owned by a franchisee (including facilities on which a franchisee has leased capacity), of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, any associated converters, and all equipment used to provide cable service within the county as described herein, including property necessary to maintain interoperability as defined by state and federal law or regulations. 
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or its successor agency. 
Franchise: A non-exclusive authorization granted in accordance with this article and exercised in accordance with a franchise agreement to install cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable system along the rights-of-way within the county to provide cable services. 
Franchise agreement: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this article between the county and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this article, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised. 
Franchisee: A person granted a franchise by the county under this article, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
Franchisee representative: Employees or agents of franchisee who have the authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to address customer service issues such as billing questions, adjusting bills, and scheduling service and installation calls. 
Gross revenues: All cash, credits, property, or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by the franchisee, its subsidiaries, parent or any subsidiary of its parent, arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the sale or exchange of cable services by the franchisee within the county. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for basic service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any optional, premium or per-channel or per-program service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, re-connection and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments or other consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming on the system; converter fees, rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees (but not for non-cable purposes); advertising revenues; revenues derived by the franchisee from home shopping channel sales to county residents; and the sales, exchange or cablecast by the franchisee of any programming developed on or for access channels or institutional users. Revenues received by franchisee from the delivery of internet access service over its cable system shall be included in gross revenues until such time as a final non-appealable determination by the FCC or a court with jurisdiction over the county determines that franchise fees are not assessable on such revenues. Advertising and home shopping revenues shall be allocated on a pro-rata basis based on the proportion of total subscribers on franchisee's cable system represented by subscribers residing within the county. Gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee imposed pursuant to section 5-23(c) hereof. Gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee (other than the franchise fee) which are imposed on any subscriber or user by the state, county, county or other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit. 
Institutional network: A voice, data, and/or video communications system constructed, operated and/or maintained by the franchisee within the county, the transmissions on which are generally available only to, and intended to be sent and received by, persons other than cable subscribers generally. Such a system may be integrated into the cable system provided by franchisee, and is not necessarily a physically separate system. 
Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof. 
Public nuisance: A condition dangerous to the health, safety, peace, comfort or convenience of the general public. 
Right-of-way: All present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways. 
Transfer of a franchise: Any transaction in which: 
(1)  Ownership or other interest in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of the franchisee is transferred; or 
(2)  The rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under a franchise are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. 
A transfer is pro forma when it involves no substantial change in the ultimate ownership or control of the franchisee; however, the duty to establish the pro forma characteristics of a transaction rests with the franchisee. 
Two-way capability: The incorporation into a cable system of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features so that two-way transmission, including addressability, over the system can be implemented and activated. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  A franchise authorizes the use of rights-of-way for installing facilities to operate a cable system within the entire area or a specified area of the county, but does not expressly or impliedly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, install cable, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except as may be provided by applicable law, including section 621 of the Cable Act) or to use publicly or privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(2)  A franchise is nonexclusive, and will not expressly or impliedly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate such systems within the county, or affect the county's right to authorize use of rights-of-way to other persons as it determines appropriate. 
(3)  Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by the county and a franchisee, such franchise agreement shall constitute a contract between the franchisee and the county, and the terms, conditions, and provisions of such franchise agreement, together with this article and all other duly enacted and applicable laws, shall define the rights and obligations of the franchisee and the county relating to the franchise. 
(4)  A franchise agreement shall contain provisions setting forth when a transfer of a franchise will be deemed to have taken place, taking into account the ownership structure of the particular franchisee. 
(5)  A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all generally applicable laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the county not inconsistent with the terms of its franchise, including, but not limited to, county ordinances related to the use and occupancy of rights-of-way. 
(6)  Except as may be specifically provided in this article or under the terms of a franchise agreement, the failure of the county, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this article or a franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or waiver of compliance or performance. 
(7)  The provisions of this article in effect on the effective date of a franchise shall apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement, and the express terms of this article will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement, unless such franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this article. 
(8)  Except as to matters which are governed solely by federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 3-21-06, § 1.00) 
Sec. 5-22. - Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of franchises. 
(a)  Application required. 
(1)  A written application shall be filed with the county for: 
a.  Granting of a new franchise; 
b.  Renewal of a cable franchise under formal procedures in accordance with section 626 of the Cable Act; 
c.  Modification of a franchise agreement; 
d.  A transfer of a franchise; or 
e.  Any other relief from the county pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement. 
An applicant has the burden to demonstrate in its application compliance with all requirements of this article and of all applicable laws. 
(2)  To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with three copies, be accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in section 5-22(b) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(3)  All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the county for public inspection. 
(b)  Information in application. 
(1)  An application for the grant of a franchise or for the renewal of a franchise under formal procedures in accordance with section 626 of the Cable Act shall contain, at minimum, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all persons with five percent or more ownership interest; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or major stockholder of the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a franchise or license revoked, or been found by any court or administrative agency to have violated a security or antitrust law, or to have committed a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances; 
c.  A statement of the proposed method of construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of the percentage of the system to be constructed underground, and the proposed construction schedule; 
d.  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state requirements; 
e.  An indication of the applicant's technical, legal, and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
f.  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of communities in which the applicant or any of its principals have, or have had, a cable franchise or license or any interest therein; 
g.  An identification of the area of the county to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the service area's boundaries; 
h.  A description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities; 
i.  A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the projected cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the county; and 
j.  Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article and information that the county may request of the applicant that is relevant to the county's consideration of the application, including the requirement for a guarantee by applicant's parent. 
(2)  An application for modification of a cable franchise shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
a.  The specific modification requested; 
b.  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved; 
c.  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to section 625 of the Cable Act, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in the Cable Act; and 
d.  Any other information necessary for the county to make an informed determination on the application for modification. 
(3)  An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise and a notification of a pro forma transfer shall both comply with the requirements of section 5-23(y) hereof. 
(4)  To be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amounts set forth in fee schedules adopted by the county from time to time by ordinance. The current application fee is set at $5,000.00. 
(Ord. of 3-21-06, § 1.00) 
Sec. 5-23. - General provisions. 
(a)  Term of franchise. 
(1)  Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the county may grant cable franchises authorizing the franchisee to construct, expand, reconstruct, maintain, use and or operate in, along, across, on, over, through, above and under the rights-of-way to provide cable services. Such franchises shall be granted for terms not to exceed 15 years. 
(2)  In determining the length of franchise to grant to a potential franchisee or the length of a franchise renewal, the county shall determine the applicant's willingness and ability to meet the community's needs as such needs have been identified, and the flexibility of the franchisee to accommodate those needs as they change during the term of the franchise. 
(b)  Grant of franchise. 
(1)  The county may make the grant of a cable franchise conditioned upon the completion of construction within a prescribed time or upon the performance of other specific obligations which are to be set forth in the franchise agreement, specifying that failure to comply with the condition will cause the franchise to become null and void, subject to the procedural requirement of section 5-23(aa) hereof. 
(2)  In evaluating an application for a cable franchise, the county may consider, among other things, the ability of public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, the potential disruption to users of public rights-of-way, and resultant inconvenience, if any, to the public. 
(3)  The county may hold a public hearing to consider an application. Based upon the application, the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the county manager or staff, and any other information relevant to the application, the county shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny an application. 
(c)  Compensation to county for franchise. 
(1)  As compensation for the privilege granted under a cable franchise for the use of the rights-of-way to construct and operate a cable system for the provision of cable services, franchisee shall pay to the county a cable franchise fee equal to five percent of its gross revenues. The franchise fee shall be paid on a quarterly basis. 
(2)  Franchisee may calculate gross revenues for purposes of determining the cable franchise fee owed on either a cash or accrual basis, provided, however, the franchisee must use the same method throughout the term of the franchise absent the prior written consent of the county manager. If franchisee calculates gross revenues on an accrual basis, franchisee may subtract its actual bad debt expenses for the relevant period from gross revenues, as appropriate, provided, however, that any bad debt subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues, as appropriate, in the period in which the bad debt is collected. 
(3)  A franchisee shall file within three months following the end of each of its fiscal years a statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year. The statement shall contain detail on the revenue items contained within the definition of gross revenues in section 5-21(a) herein, and shall be certified by a certified public accountant or the franchisee's chief financial officer. The franchisee shall bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. Upon request by the county, which request shall not be made more often than once every three years, franchisee shall cause an independent audit to be performed of its franchise fee payments for any period previously un-audited from the present to the adoption of the existing franchise agreement. Such audit shall be at franchisee's expense. A request by the county under this provision shall not prevent the county from undertaking its own audits, at times deemed appropriate by the county, of franchisee's performance under this article and its franchise for any period previously un-audited from the present to the adoption of the existing franchise agreement. 
(4)  The acceptance by the county of any payment from franchisee of the cable franchise fee shall not constitute a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the county may have against franchisee for performance of any of its obligations under its franchise, or local, state or federal law, including, without limitation, franchisee's obligation to pay the proper franchise fee amount owed. 
(5)  Following the expiration or the termination for any reason of its franchise, franchisee shall pay the franchise fee owed as of the date that its operations ceased within 90 calendar days of ceasing such operations. Such payment shall be accompanied by a gross revenues audit report prepared by a certified public accountant showing the revenues received, and any deductions made therefrom, by franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. 
(d)  Minimum facilities and services. 
(1)  The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all cable franchises granted by the county. The county may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the application, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet public needs. 
a.  Each cable system shall offer services that meet the current and future needs of the county. The franchise agreement shall include a complete description of the design of the cable system and how the cable system will meet the current and projected needs of the county. For new franchisees, such service shall, at a minimum, be comparable to the services offered by existing franchisees in the county. 
b.  The cable system must have two-way capability. 
c.  All television signals received by franchisee for carriage on franchisee's cable system that contain closed caption information for the hearing impaired shall be transmitted over franchisee's cable system with such closed caption information for the hearing impaired. 
d.  All antennas, supporting structures, and outside plant used in operating and maintaining franchisee's cable system must comply with the recommendations of the National Electric Safety Code and all federal, state, county, county and/or utility laws, ordinances, rules and regulations on tower structures and outside plant. 
e.  All construction, installation and maintenance of franchisee's cable system must comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, all state and local laws and regulations, and accepted industry practices. 
f.  Franchisee must not design, install, or operate its system in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
g.  Franchisee's cable system shall meet or exceed all technical and signal quality standards of the FCC. 
h.  Franchisee shall ensure that both audio and video reception of cable channels with predominantly adult programming, both analog and digital, not subscribed to by subscribers, are completely blocked. 
(2)  Franchisees may, and upon request from the county shall, periodically survey subscribers to assess programming preferences. The results of such surveys shall be submitted to the county upon completion. If requested by the county, franchisee shall submit proposed questions to the county for its review prior to undertaking the survey. If the survey indicates subscriber preference for programming not presently carried on franchisee's cable system, franchisee shall undertake commercially reasonable efforts to determine the technical, contractual and economic feasibility of adding such programming, and shall report its finding to the county. 
(3)  Periodic reviews: 
a.  When the county deems it advisable, but no more often than every five years during the term of the franchise, the county shall give notice to the franchisee and the public that it is commencing an evaluation of the franchisee's performance under its franchise. The results of this evaluation shall be reported at a public board of commissioners meeting. The primary purpose of this evaluation shall be to consider whether the franchisee has substantially complied with, or made all reasonable efforts to comply with, all substantive requirements of its franchise, especially the customer service standards. 
b.  Notice of all evaluation sessions shall be published in the same way as a legal notice. 
c.  If an evaluation proceeding has revealed deficiencies in the franchisee's performance under its franchise, the county shall notify the franchisee and request that the deficiencies be corrected within a reasonable period of time. If the deficiencies involve substantial non-compliance and repeated non-compliance with the franchise and are not, or cannot be, corrected within a reasonable period of time, the county may initiate a proceeding proposing the termination of the franchise or other appropriate action. 
(4)  Annual performance report: 
a.  On or before March 1 of each year, the franchisee shall file a report with the county covering system activity in the prior calendar year. The report shall include: 
1.  Changes in programming and rates; 
2.  Changes in other services offered; 
3.  Capital investments in the system, which impact services in the county, during the year; 
4.  A current list of officers and directors; 
5.  Proposed changes for the coming year; 
6.  A completed subscriber survey, as described in section 5-23(j)(3); 
7.  A certification of compliance with customer service standards set forth in section 5-23(j) of this article. 
b.  At the county's request, franchisee shall attend a board of commissioners meeting for the purpose of presenting the annual performance report and addressing comments and questions from the board of commissioners and members of the public. 
(5)  To assist in its review and evaluations, the county may enlist an independent consultant to conduct an analysis of the cable system and its performance and to submit a report of such analysis to the county. Topics which may be addressed include, but shall not be limited to: franchise fees, services, application of new technologies, cable system technical performance, and related facilities and equipment, subscriber complaints, privacy, amendments, subsequent legal developments, including judicial and FCC rulings, and franchisee or county rules. During evaluations by the county, the franchisee shall cooperate fully with the county and shall provide, without cost, such existing information and documents as the county may reasonably request. Nothing in this section shall be implied as reopening franchise negotiations or making modifications to the franchise. 
(e)  Public, educational, and governmental access channels. 
(1)  The county has determined that it is in the public interest for all franchisees to provide non-commercial public, educational, and governmental ("PEG") access channels on the cable system for the benefit of the public, as determined by the county. The provision of such PEG access channels shall be without charge to the county. Unless specifically allowed by the county, all PEG access channels shall be available to all subscribers on a basis equal in quality and accessibility to other basic tier services and shall be placed on the basic tier of service without separately listed charge. The county's use of underwriting to support programming on the access channels shall not constitute commercial use of such channels. 
(2)  Should the franchisee, due to business necessity, realign channels which results in PEG channels being relocated, the franchisee will assist the PEG channel operator with advertising and reasonable expenses required to inform viewers of the new channel location. 
(3)  The number of PEG access channels to be provided by each franchisee shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. The county may designate PEG channels for use by public, educational or governmental access users or organizations at its sole discretion. The county may designate one channel for several users or users on a shared basis. The county may promulgate rules and procedures for the use of channels, facilities, equipment and other support designated for PEG access. In the case of any franchise under which channel capacity is designated for PEG use, the county may promulgate rules and procedures under which franchisee is permitted to use such channel capacity for the provision of other services if such channel capacity is not being used for such designated purposes. 
(4)  Each franchisee shall interconnect its system with all other systems operating under a franchise granted by the county so that the channels designated for PEG access shall be transmitted on all systems simultaneously and on the same channels, where technically feasible. This obligation includes the provision of all devices required to accomplish such interconnection. To the extent that a franchisee is providing facilities, support or programming for PEG access channels that another franchisee is required to carry by interconnection, the interconnecting franchisee shall on a quarterly basis reimburse such franchisee for a pro rata share of the out-of-pocket expenditures made during such quarter by the franchisee to provide such facilities, support or programming. The interconnecting franchisee's pro rata share shall be a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the interconnecting franchisee's subscribers and the denominator of which is the total number of subscribers of all franchisees receiving such PEG content, determined as of the end of each calendar quarter. 
(5)  Franchisee shall have no rights to PEG channel programming by virtue of cable-casting or distributing such programming over its cable system, except for franchisee's right to transmit such programming to all the subscribers receiving a signal from the cable system head-end serving the Bulloch area. All rights to programming content and intellectual property of any type transmitted by franchisee shall remain the property of the owner, regardless of the individual or entity requesting transmission. No intellectual property transmitted over PEG Channels or bandwidth shall be retransmitted by franchisee or any affiliates in whole or in part without the consent of its owner. 
(6)  The PEG channels shall be placed under the authority of the county for use related to governmental and educational purposes or individual expression. PEG channel use may include sponsorships and underwriting. No restrictions shall be placed on the use of these channels for a public purpose of a governmental entity or curriculum requirement of an educational institution, except as provided in this article and in individual franchises. As provided by law, franchisee shall not exercise editorial control over programming of any PEG channel. At no time shall the franchisee interrupt at its head-end or hub site the signal provided on any PEG channel without the express consent of the county, except in circumstances beyond the franchisee's control. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchisee may undertake normal maintenance activities that will interrupt the signal provided that such maintenance activities will be scheduled to cause a minimum of disruption to planned programming. 
(7)  In the event it becomes both technologically and economically feasible to provide over the same channel video, audio, and/or data signals, franchisee shall meet and discuss with the county those alternative uses for the PEG channels. 
(8)  If a franchise requires a periodic re-evaluation of the number of PEG channels to be provided by a franchisee, the usage of such channels shall be as provided herein. An educational or government access channel shall be considered to be minimally utilized when 50 percent of the 18 available cablecast hours per day are programmed, of which at least 20 percent is for non-repeat programming. An educational or government access channel shall be considered to be fully utilized when 80 percent of the 18 available cablecast hours are programmed (of which at least 50 percent is for non-repeat programming). A public access channel shall be considered to be minimally utilized when 25 percent of the programming is non-repeat programming. A public access channel shall be considered to be fully utilized when 80 percent of the programming is for non-repeat programming. The calculation of the minimum and maximum described shall be measured in each one-week period averaged over one calendar year. The available cablecast hours for purposes of this paragraph do not include the hours between midnight and 6:00 a.m. If additional channels are required to be provided, but can only be accommodated on digital, or non-basic tiers, franchisee shall cooperate with the county in determining the channel assignments to be made and notification requirements to subscribers. 
(9)  The franchisee shall provide reasonable technical assistance necessary to transmit access programming on the PEG channels as directed by the county, as applicable, on an as-needed basis. 
(10)  In addition to the requirement that franchisee provide PEG access channels, franchisee may also be required to provide funds for production facilities and equipment for PEG channels in an amount to be set forth in the franchise agreement. All such facilities and equipment shall be for the benefit of the county and its residents and shall be subject to the sole control of the county, but franchisee may hold legal ownership title. 
(11)  It is contemplated that the county may award more than one franchise for the provision of cable services in the county. Each franchisee shall be required to contribute to meeting the county's identified needs and goals with regard to the provision of PEG channels. Toward that end, the county may require each franchisee to interconnect with other franchisees, to provide separate PEG channels, or to provide cash contributions. The details and substance of such requirements shall be negotiated with each franchisee and included in the individual franchise agreements, with the goal that the obligations to meet the county's identified needs and goals shall be equitably shared among all franchisees. 
(f)  Service to public institutions; additional government access support; institutional network. Franchisees shall be required to provide cable service without charge to facilities within the county passed by the cable system that are owned or predominantly occupied by the county, county or a public educational institution, that are devoted to predominantly educational or governmental use and that are specified in the franchise agreement. 
(g)  Emergency use of cable system. Franchisee shall install and maintain an audio override on all channels for transmission of emergency messages and alerts as required by federal law. Franchisee shall also cooperate and coordinate with the county emergency preparedness coordinator and with the county manager's designee with regard to emergency communications. 
(h)  Lockout devices. Franchisee shall make available at a reasonable charge to any residential subscriber, upon the request of such subscriber of the cable system, a parental guidance or lock-out device which shall permit the subscriber, at his or her option, to eliminate the audio and visual transmissions from any channel reception. Franchisee shall advise all residential subscribers annually of the availability of such devices. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  Customer service requirements for cable systems. 
(1)  Franchisee shall comply with each of the customer service requirements set forth in attachment "A" to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  If franchisee is building a new cable system in the county, it shall have a period of six months from the time its cable system is operational and it is providing cable service in the county, to come into compliance with the requirements. If franchisee is building a new cable system in the county in phases, it shall have a period of 90 calendar days from the time each phase of its cable system is operational and it is providing cable service within that phase, to come into compliance with the requirements. 
(3)  Franchisee shall submit quarterly reports certifying its compliance with the customer service requirements and explaining any instances of non-compliance during the report period. 
(4)  In every other year during the term of its franchise, and upon request by the county, franchisee shall conduct annual surveys of subscribers to assess subscriber satisfaction with the franchisee's customer service. The surveys shall be performed by an independent entity. Complete copies of the annual compliance reports and surveys shall be provided to the county at the time of franchisee's annual performance report, as set forth in section 5-23(d)(4). If requested by county, franchisee shall submit copies of proposed survey questions prior to the survey being undertaken for the county's review and comments. Customer surveys to assess compliance with the telephone answering standards of attachment A to the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be included in the biannual surveys if any one of franchisee's quarterly reports within the 12 calendar months preceding the subscriber survey indicates a clear failure of franchisee to comply with such standards. A clear failure to comply is shown by franchisee's failure to meet the compliance percentages contained in attachment A to the ordinance from which this article is derived, sections 7 and 10 thereof. 
(k)  Cable system subscriber privacy. A franchisee shall protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of section 631 of the Cable Act. 
(l)  Discrimination prohibited. 
(1)  No franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant illegal preferences or advantages to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers, nor subject any such persons or group of persons to any illegal prejudice or any disadvantage; provided, however, a franchisee may offer discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers provided that such discounts are offered on a non-discriminatory basis. A franchisee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, handicap, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for the elderly or handicapped that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. 
(2)  A franchisee shall not deny cable service to any potential subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscriber resides. 
(m)  Rates. If a cable franchise franchisee is subject to effective competition, nothing in this article shall be construed to allow the county in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, to regulate rates for franchisee's cable system, installation, disconnection, or equipment rental, such prohibition of rate regulation being in accordance with state and federal law. If, at any time during the term of its franchise, franchisee is not subject to effective competition, the county reserves the right to institute cable service rate regulation as permitted under applicable law. 
(n)  Technical standards. 
(1)  Any cable system within the county shall meet or exceed the technical standards set by the FCC as hereafter may be amended or adopted, and any other standards set forth in this article, the franchise, or other applicable federal or state laws or regulations. 
(2)  All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with the National Electric Safety Code, the National Electric Code, all laws and accepted industry practices, and as such may hereafter be amended or adopted. 
(3)  The county may require an annual proof of performance test or other tests to be performed at the expense of the franchisee. At the times specified in the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall perform at its expense proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article, the franchise agreement, and then existing FCC requirements. If the county has provided written notice of its desire to observe performance tests, the franchisee shall notify the county so that the county may have an observer present. The franchisee shall provide the proof of performance test results promptly to the county. The county shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement, this article and FCC standards. 
(4)  A franchisee shall not design, install, or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
(o)  Security fund. 
(1)  Within 30 calendar days of the effective date of the franchise, the franchisee shall post with the county a security fund to ensure the faithful performance of all provisions of this article, the franchise agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the county, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the county which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system. At the franchisee's option, the security fund may take the form of a cash deposit, a surety bond, a letter of credit, or other forms of security as approved by the county. The minimum amount of a security fund shall be $15,000. The minimum security fund amount shall increase on January 1 of each year by the same percentage that the Consumer Price Index applicable to the county area increases. The county shall inform franchise applicants of the amount of the required security fund. A franchise agreement may provide for a security fund greater than the minimum specified in this article where the county determines, under circumstances existing at the time, that such larger security fund is necessary in light of the size of the franchisee's system or the nature of its financial qualifications or experience, or to protect the public or to provide adequate incentive to the franchisee to comply with this article and the franchise agreement. 
(2)  If franchisee posts a cash security, the county shall place the security deposit in an interest bearing account. The interest will accrue to the benefit of franchisee but may not be withdrawn by franchisee; all interest will be added to and become part of the security fund during the term of the franchise. The county shall monitor the amount of interest being deposited into the cash security fund to determine whether the security fund is increasing by the same amount that the Consumer Price Index referenced in paragraph (1) is increasing. In the event that the county determines that the interest deposits into the security fund are not maintaining the security fund at the level required by application of the Consumer Price Index, the county shall notify the franchisee that additional cash deposits are required. 
(3)  If franchisee posts a security fund other than cash, the amount of the security fund shall be increased each year by the same percentage amount that the Consumer Price Index referenced in paragraph (1) is increasing. The county shall notify the franchisee during the first calendar quarter each year of the additional funds required. 
(4)  If a franchisee fails to pay the county any fees or taxes, liquidated damages, damages, or costs or expenses incurred by the county by reason of any act or default of the franchisee, or if the franchisee fails to comply with any provision of this article or of its franchise agreement that the county manager determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund, the county manager may, after 30 calendar days notice to the franchisee, withdraw that amount with any interest or penalties from the security fund. Within 15 calendar days of receipt of such notice from the county manager, the franchisee may file a written request for a board of commissioners hearing on the matter. Such hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of the county manager decision to withdraw from the security fund, unless the county wishes to extend the time period. During such hearing, the franchisee shall have an opportunity to be heard, to present evidence and testimony in its behalf. The county shall not withdraw any funds until such time as the hearing has been completed. If the franchisee does not file a written request to the board of commissioners for a hearing within the prescribed time period, then the county may withdraw such funds as provided in the resolution. After any withdrawal from the security fund, the county shall promptly notify the franchisee of the amount and date of the withdrawal. 
(5)  Within 30 calendar days after notice to the franchisee that an amount has been withdrawn by the county from the security fund, the franchisee shall pay into its security fund sufficient funds to restore the security fund to the total amount in the fund immediately prior to the withdrawal. If the franchisee fails to restore the security fund to the original amount within 30 calendar days, the entire security fund remaining may be forfeited, and/or such failure may be considered a material breach of this article and the franchise agreement may be used as grounds for revocation of the franchise. 
(6)  The security fund will become the property of the county in the event the franchise is revoked. The franchisee is entitled to the return of the balance of the security fund that remains following the expiration of the franchise, provided that there is no outstanding default or unpaid amounts owed to the county by the franchisee. 
(7)  The rights reserved to the county with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the county, whether reserved by this article, by the franchise agreement, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund will affect any other right the county may have. 
(p)  Payment of audit costs and consultant and legal fees. 
(1)  If an audit of franchise fee payments is performed by the county and such audit findings indicate an underpayment by franchisee of franchise fees in the amount of four percent of more, all costs of such audit shall be reimbursed by the franchisee to the county upon receipt of written notice. Additionally, in the event any audit, whether performed by the county or by franchisee upon county's request, results in a finding of underpayment by the franchisee, franchisee shall pay a late payment penalty to the county in the amount of one percent per month from the time the payment was originally due. 
(2)  A franchisee shall pay all costs and fees of outside consultants and retained counsel incurred by the county for processing and evaluating franchisee's application and for reviewing and administering franchisee's compliance with this article, and with the franchise agreement and other applicable ordinances, laws, rules or regulations. Franchisee's obligations for such costs and fees shall not in any event exceed a reasonable amount as set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(3)  The grant of an initial franchise, a renewed franchise, an application to modify a franchise agreement, or an application to transfer a franchise may be subject to a processing fee, in an amount not to exceed the county's out-of-pocket costs, including all costs and fees incurred by the county for consultants, analysts and counsel, in considering the application, less the amount of the filing fee set pursuant to section 5-22(b). Within 30 calendar days from the date of the action by board of commissioners granting or denying the franchise, franchise renewal, franchise modification or transfer thereof, the county shall notify the franchisee of the amount of any processing fee and its method of calculation. If the processing fee is not paid to the county within 30 calendar days of the date of the notification, any approvals granted by such board of commissioners action will be null and void. 
(q)  Construction schedule. 
(1)  Specific construction schedules shall be as provided in the franchise. It is expected that all franchisees shall provide a minimum of 54 video channels for cable service, and that the construction schedule provided, if appropriate, in the franchise shall be sufficient to make such cable service available to all areas of the county no later than mid-way through the term of the franchise, but in no event later than 5 years from the date of board of commissioners approval. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall prevent franchisee from completing the construction of the system earlier than required under the terms of the franchise or from providing more channels than the minimum specified in this article. 
(3)  For proposed cable systems, franchisee shall make available to the county manager or his/her designee for review a construction plan and maps for construction of the proposed cable system at least 30 calendar days prior to the start of any and all construction undertaken to complete the cable system. The construction plan shall include design details, equipment specifications, design performance criteria, and street repair details and plans. The construction plan shall also include a map of the entire franchise area and shall clearly delineate the following: 
a.  Areas within the franchise area where the constructed cable system will initially be available to subscribers, including a schedule of construction for each year that construction is proposed; and 
b.  Areas, if any, within the franchise area where the cable system cannot reasonably be constructed due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. 
(4)  Failure to comply with the requirements of subsections (1) and (3) of this subsection, including any delay beyond the dates specified herein, unless approved in writing in advance by the county, will constitute a material breach of this article and of the franchise agreement and shall result in appropriate sanctions, including without limitation the imposition of penalties prescribed in this article. 
(r)  Construction work regulation by county, alterations, public improvements and underground conduit use by franchisee. 
(1)  All franchisees must comply with the provisions of the county's ordinances as from time to time amended, with regard to all activities of franchisee in the rights-of-way. 
(2)  All franchisees must bury cable television distribution lines and cables which are on private property and which are intended to be installed below ground, within a reasonable time, not to exceed seven working days from the date of installation. 
(s)  Bonds. 
(1)  If a new cable system is to be constructed by franchisee, before construction of the cable system has commenced, franchisee shall obtain and maintain for one year, at its sole cost and expense, and file with the county, a corporate surety bond with a surety company authorized to do business in the state and found acceptable by the county attorney, in the amount of $500,000.00 to secure franchisee's performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all requirements under this article and its franchise agreement. After the first initial year, no bond shall be required unless substantial construction is again commenced by franchisee, in which case a bond in the amount of $500,000.00 shall be obtained. Such bond shall secure franchisee's performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all requirements under this article and its franchise agreement. In the alternative, franchisee may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in the same amounts in lieu of obtaining a bond. The determination of when a bond is required shall be solely within the discretion of the county, taking into account the scope of proposed construction in relation to the size of the cable system then existing. Construction bond requirements contained in the county's ordinances shall be complied with at all times, provided at its sole discretion, the county may reduce or waive altogether the bond requirements contained in this section. 
(2)  The rights reserved to the county with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights of the county, whether reserved by this article or authorized by law; and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall affect any other rights the county may have. 
(3)  The bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor any intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until sixty (60) calendar days after receipt by the County, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent." 
(t)  Enforcement remedies. 
(1)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the county has the right to apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates this article, its franchise agreement, or applicable state or federal law: 
a.  Liquidated damages. The county may impose liquidated damages in the following amounts. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to comply with the franchise agreement and ordinance requirements. 
1.  For failure to substantially complete system construction or line extensions as required, unless the county specifically approves a delay for good cause shown, franchisee shall pay up to $1,000.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, the deficiency continues. 
2.  For material failure to provide data, documents, reports or information in a timely manner as required, franchisee shall pay up to $200.00 per day, or part thereof, that each violation occurs or continues. 
3.  For failure to substantially comply with the material provisions of sections 5-23(d) (minimum facilities and services), 5-23(e) (access channels) and 5-23(o) (technical standards) of this article, franchisee shall pay up to $1,000.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that the violation continues. 
4.  For failure to comply with the provisions of section 5-23(y) (assignment or lease of franchise) of this article, franchisee shall pay up to $1,000.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that the violation continues. 
5.  For failure to comply with any other material provision of this article or of a franchise agreement within 15 calendar days of receipt of notice of such non-compliance, the franchisee shall pay up to $600.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that such non-compliance continues. 
6.  For failure to substantially comply with reasonable orders of the county pursuant to the terms of the franchise, franchisee shall pay up to $200.00 per day for each day, or part thereof, that noncompliance continues. 
7.  Before assessing liquidated damages against franchisee, the county shall give franchisee written notice of its intention to assess such damages. Following receipt of such notice, franchisee and the county shall have a 15-calendar-day period during which time franchisee and the county shall make good faith reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute in question. If the dispute is not resolved in that 15-calendar-day period, the county may collect liquidated damages owed, either through drawdown of the security fund as provided in this article, or through any other means allowed by law. 
b.  Revocation or termination of franchise. Each franchise is subject to revocation, termination or shortening as the county determines is reasonable pursuant to the provisions of section 5-23(bb) of this article. 
(2)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the county shall take into consideration the nature of the breach, the person or persons bearing the impact of the breach, and such other matters as the county determines are appropriate. 
(3)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the county may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  Failure of the county to enforce any requirements of a franchise agreement or this article shall not constitute a waiver of the county's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(5)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, the fees, penalties, and procedures for the assessment of liquidated damages for non-compliance with the customer service and consumer protection requirements shall be as set forth in attachment A to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(u)  Accounts, records, reports and investigations. 
(1)  Franchisee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of its business and operations pursuant to its franchise agreement in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. If required by the FCC, franchisee shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by the FCC in 47 CFR Part 32 or its successor and as may be further described herein. All pertinent records of franchisee shall be subject to audit by the county to determine franchisee's compliance with the provisions of this article and the franchise. 
(2)  Franchisee shall report to the county such other information relating to the performance of its obligations under its franchise as the county may reasonably require and shall comply with the county's reasonable determination of forms for reports, the time for reports, the frequency with which any reports are to be made, and if reports are to be made under oath. 
(3)  Franchisee shall make available to the county, upon written request, its books and records to examine, audit, review and/or obtain copies of the papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records of franchisee pertaining to compliance with its franchise. Franchisee shall fully cooperate in making available its records in either an electronic or paper content at the discretion of the county, and otherwise assisting in these activities. 
(4)  The county may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to franchisee's performance of the terms and conditions of its franchise agreement and of this article. Franchisee shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(5)  Franchisee shall provide the county with notices of all petitions, applications, written communications and reports submitted by franchisee or on franchisee's behalf to the FCC and the public utility commission of the state, or their successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the use of county rights-of-way. Upon written request from county, franchisee shall also provide the county with documentation related to such notices, applications, written communications and reports. 
(6)  Upon request by the county, franchisee shall provide a summary of subscriber or consumer complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information on complaints shall be submitted upon request of the county. 
(7)  Prior to disclosure of information clearly claimed in writing to be confidential or proprietary by franchisee, the county shall give franchisee reasonable notice of any request for such information made to the county pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, or other applicable law. 
(8)  If franchisee normally maintains a complete set of books and records in the county, such books and records shall be available for inspection and audit by the county for purposes of ascertaining compliance with requirements of this article and the franchise agreement. If such records are maintained outside of the county in the normal course of business, upon request of the county the specific location of all such records shall be identified and such records shall be made available for inspection by the county or its representatives. All reasonable expenses incurred by the county, not to exceed $3,000.00, in traveling to the location of the records, if outside the county, shall be paid by the franchisee regardless of whether such inspection results in audit findings against franchisee. Such inspection and audit shall be upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. 
(v)  Exercise of authority. In order to ascertain any and all facts relating to the exercise of its authority under this article and the franchise agreement, the county shall have full power and authority from franchisee to: inspect, or cause to be inspected, the books and records of franchisee; inventory and appraise, or cause to be inventoried or appraised, the property of franchisee within the county; compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and records; and prescribe reasonable penalties for the failure or refusal of franchisee to testify or to produce books and records from time to time as reasonably required. 
(w)  Interconnection of other service providers. 
(1)  Franchisee shall be required to provide interconnection with other service providers in a manner consistent with federal and/or state regulations. 
(2)  In case of an emergency or disaster, franchisee shall, upon reasonable request of the county, make available its facilities to the county, without cost, for emergency use. 
(x)  Transfer, assignment or lease of franchise. 
(1)  Neither its franchise, the cable system, nor any rights or privileges of franchisee under this article or its franchise agreement, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by franchisee to any other person, firm, corporation affiliate or entity, without the prior written consent of the county. Consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
(2)  Should the franchisee sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under its franchise, including franchisee's facilities, or attempt to do so, without the county's prior consent, the county may revoke the franchise for default, in which event all rights and interest of the franchisee shall cease and no purported sale, assignment, transfer or conveyance shall be effective. 
(3)  The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to persons that control, are controlled by, or are under common control of franchisee provided the county receives written notice of such pro forma transfer at least 60 days prior to the transfer in accord with county ordinance. 
a.  In order for a transfer to be considered pro forma under the terms hereof, franchisee must present to the county a guarantee from its corporate parent guaranteeing all payments under the franchise and all obligations of franchisee under the franchise, in substantially the same form as attached hereto as attachment B to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  A written notice of a pro forma transfer shall include the full legal name of the pro forma transferee, transferee's relationship to franchisee, and names and addresses of contact persons for transferee. The franchisee shall also provide a certificate of good standing from the state secretary of state for transferee. 
c.  Unless county notifies franchisee within 30 calendar days after receipt of notice of a pro forma transfer that the transfer does not qualify as a pro forma transfer, citing reasons therefor, the pro forma transfer shall be deemed approved by the county. 
(4)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a non-pro forma transfer of a franchise, the county shall consider: 
a.  The legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; 
b.  Whether the incumbent is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this article and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; and 
c.  Whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect service or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
(5)  No application for a non-pro forma transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this article and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous franchisee under this article and the franchise agreement. 
(6)  Approval by the county of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the county under this article or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(7)  Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. 
(y)  Notices. All notices required herein shall be in writing and shall be delivered in person to the respective parties or sent by certified mail at the addresses set forth in the franchise. 
(z)  Violations. 
(1)  If the county has reason to believe that franchisee is in violation of this article or of its franchise agreement, the county shall notify franchisee in writing of the violation setting forth the nature of such violation. Within 15 calendar days of receipt of such notice, franchisee shall respond in writing to provide explanation or documentation to support that the violation did not occur. Franchisee shall be allowed 30 calendar days to cure violations after written notice is received from the county, by taking appropriate steps to comply with the terms of this article and any lawful regulations. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully cured within 30 calendar days, the period of time in which franchisee must cure the violation shall be extended for such additional time necessary to complete the cure, provided that: 
a.  Franchisee shall have promptly commenced to cure; and 
b.  Franchisee is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. 
(2)  Upon evidence being received by the county that violations of this article, the franchise agreement, any County Charter provisions or any ordinances lawfully regulating franchisee in the construction and operation of its facilities have occurred, or continue to occur after the 30-calendar-day period, and any additional time necessary to cure, the county may cause an investigation to be made. If the county finds that such a violation continues to exist or has occurred, then the county may take any action authorized by law, including forfeiture of the franchise or a suit in court to compel compliance. If, in any such proceeding, default is finally established, franchisee shall pay to the county the reasonable expenses incurred in the prosecution of such suit and all of the county's damages and reasonable costs (including reasonable attorney fees and litigation expenses). 
(3)  Failure by the county to enforce any rights under this article does not constitute a waiver of such rights. 
(aa)  Forfeiture and termination. 
(1)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the county under this article or otherwise, the county reserves the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of franchisee there-under in the event of material breach of its terms and conditions, subject to reasonable notice and opportunity to cure, as provided herein. 
(2)  Material breaches of this article specifically include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Transactions which have the effect of circumventing the payment of required franchise fees due under this article and/or evasion of payment of the franchise fees due under this article by non-collection or non-reporting of revenues, bartering or any other means which unlawfully evade the actual collection of revenues pursued by franchisee. The foregoing shall not constitute a substantial breach if the violation occurs without the fault of franchisee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. 
b.  Any violation of county ordinances. 
(3)  In the event franchisee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise or of this article is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. Such causes beyond franchisee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but shall not be limited to, natural disasters, civil emergencies and labor unrest or strikes. Franchisee shall notify the county whenever performance is prevented or impaired. Franchisee shall not be excused from performance of any of its obligations under this article or its franchise by mere economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. 
(4)  If, within 30 calendar days following written notice from the county to the franchisee that it is in material violation of this article or of other county ordinances, or is in material breach of the franchise agreement, the franchisee has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the county may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to consider revocation of the franchise or reduction in the term of the franchise, stating its reasons. 
(5)  A termination or reduction in the term of the franchise shall be declared only by a written decision of the board of commissioners after an appropriate public proceeding before the board of commissioners, which shall accord the franchisee due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate or reduce the term. All notice requirements shall be met by providing the franchisee at least 30 calendar days prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination or reduction of term of the franchise. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination or reduction alleged by county. 
(6)  The board of commissioners, after public hearing, and upon finding the existence of grounds to terminate or reduce the term, may declare the franchise terminated, declare the term of the franchise reduced, or excuse such grounds upon a showing by the franchisee of mitigating circumstances or good cause for the existence of such grounds. The board of commissioners determination shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of the written decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee. 
(7)  The board of commissioners may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the board of commissioners, six months after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that six-month period: 
a.  Such assignment, receivership, or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
b.  Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement, and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise agreement. 
(8)  In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the county may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the board of commissioners, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
a.  The county has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
b.  The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the county to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this article. 
(9)  If the county revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons, terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
a.  The county may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the county may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense, sell the assets in a commercially reasonable manner, recover from the proceeds the county's incurred costs in taking the action, and provide any remaining sums to the franchisee. 
b.  The county, by ordinance of the board of commissioners, may acquire ownership of the former franchisee's equipment and facilities at an equitable price consistent with the Cable Act if the franchise agreement so provides. 
c.  If equipment and facilities are abandoned by a former franchisee, the county may sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the assets. 
(10)  The county may, upon resolution of the board of commissioners, acquire ownership of and operate a cable system, whether or not such ownership is acquired following revocation or forfeiture of a franchise. 
(11)  Where the county has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or to comply with such other specific obligation as required will result in the forfeiture of the franchise under the provisions of section 5-23(aa) where it is so provided in the franchise agreement, unless the county, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of time. 
(12)  Neither franchisee's acceptance of its franchise, franchisee's appearance before the board of commissioners at any public hearing concerning proposed termination or reduction of its franchise nor any action taken by the board of commissioners as a result of any such public hearing, including a declaration of termination or reduction of term, or a finding of grounds to terminate or reduce the term, shall be construed to waive or otherwise affect the franchisee's right to seek judicial determination of the rights and responsibilities of the parties under the franchise or this article. 
(bb)  Arbitration. 
(1)  No matter or dispute between the county and a franchisee relating to this article or a franchise agreement may be subject to arbitration unless specifically provided for in the franchise agreement. Any matter that is subject to arbitration under the specific provisions of a franchise agreement may be subjected to the procedures set forth in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  The arbitration procedure employed shall be consistent with the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association and shall comply with the Georgia Arbitration Act. The county and the franchisee will each select a qualified arbitrator. The two persons selected shall select a third qualified arbitrator, and the three arbitrators will constitute a panel whose decision is binding on the county and the franchisee. The fees of the first two arbitrators shall be paid by the party selecting such person, and the third person shall be compensated one-half by the county and one-half by the franchisee. The general costs of the proceeding shall be shared equally by the county and the franchisee. 
(Ord. of 3-21-06, § 3.00) 
Sec. 5-24. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Taxes. Prior to issuance of any franchise, franchisee must certify that it is not delinquent in the payment of any taxes owed to the county and will pay any taxes owed to the county so that such taxes will not become delinquent. If the certification given is determined to be false, such false certification shall constitute grounds for termination of the franchise at the option of the county. 
(b)  Venue. The obligations and undertakings of both parties hereto shall be performed at the county. Venue of any suits arising hereunder shall be in state and federal courts having jurisdiction for the county. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  The county manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this article and franchise agreements. The county manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the county, but shall not be authorized to exercise those responsibilities that are reserved to the board of commissioners under this article or the general law of the state. 
(2)  A franchisee shall have the right to appeal to the board of commissioners any decision of the county manager relating to such franchisee or its franchise agreement. Such appeal must be made by written request within 15 calendar days of receipt of written notice of the county manager's decision that the franchisee seeks to appeal. The board of commissioners may sustain, reverse, or modify the decision in accord with the provisions of the franchise, this article and other ordinances, but the board of commissioners may not amend this article or the franchise without two readings of an ordinance. 
(3)  To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the board of commissioners shall have the sole authority to grant franchises, authorizing the entering into of franchise agreements, renew franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the non-pro forma transfer of a franchise. 
(d)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all cable franchises issued by the county to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(e)  Reservation of rights. 
(1)  The county reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. Any such additional regulations adopted by the county shall be incorporated into this article and complied with by all franchisees within 30 calendar days of the date of adoption of such additional regulation, to the extent such additional regulations are not inconsistent with a franchise. 
(2)  The county reserves the right to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire the property of the franchisee's system. 
(Ord. of 3-21-06, § 4.00) 
Chapter 6 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § I, 9-25-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Agency director. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the Bulloch County Emergency Management Agency. The chairman of the board of county commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of the cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county and cities therein on matter pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions set forth in this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Statesboro/Bulloch County emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate activities of the emergency operations center staff during period of an emergency, and under the supervision of governing officials. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § II, 9-25-90) 
Sec. 6-3. - Assignment of emergency functions. 
The Statesboro/Bulloch County emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments and the emergency functions listed in section 6-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § III, 9-25-90) 
Sec. 6-4. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the board of county commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  Enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  Seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  Sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  Perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § IV, 9-25-90) 
Sec. 6-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities therein, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § V, 9-25-90) 
Sec. 6-6. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1990-28, § VI, 9-25-90) 
Secs. 6-7—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCE SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-20. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Bulloch County Ambulance Services Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
The words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in this section, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases not specifically defined in this section shall use their ordinarily understood meaning. 
Definitions contained in O.C.G.A. Title 31, Chapter 11 and more particularly set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-11-2 and in Rules and Regulations for Ambulance Services, Chapter 290-5-30 are hereby incorporated by reference; provided, however, that terms defined therein which are not used in this article shall be deemed to be inoperative. 
Board means Bulloch County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Bulloch County, Georgia. 
County registration means an ambulance service registration compliance letter issued by the county that signifies that the ambulance service and its facilities and operations comply with this chapter. 
County registration officer means the county manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 6-22. - Supervision and administration. 
The board shall specify from time to time the division or agency of the county which shall have supervisory and enforcement authority with respect to the provisions of this article, whenever there is any requirement for the county to take any action or receive any action, the designated division or agency shall act on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Secs. 6-23—6-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMBULANCE SERVICES MANAGEMENT AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-30. - Affected services. 
This article shall apply to any ambulance service, except those listed below, which is proposed by any person to be located within the county or whose services are offered to county residents. 
Exempt emergency medical services are: An ambulance service operated by an agency of the United Sates Government, or a vehicle operated by a person who is not licensed by the state to furnish emergency medical services and who is rendering assistance temporarily, such as in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency, because of the registered ambulance service(s) of the county are insufficient or unable to meet the demands thereof, or a state licensed ambulance service requested to provide services as specified in any valid mutual aid agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 6-31. - General operations regulations. 
(a)  General compliance: All ambulance services, its vehicles and personnel shall at all times, be operated in compliance with all laws, rules, regulations, orders and decrees of the state and county. 
(b)  Base station: All ambulance services offering services to residents of the county must have a permanent base of operations located within the county. 
(c)  Hours of operation: All ambulance services offering services to residents of the county must provide such services 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(d)  Staffing: All ambulance services offering services to residents of the county shall have at least two qualified and certified personnel on duty and available to answer calls for assistance, at all times. At least one of these individuals must be certified as a paramedic. 
(e)  Vehicles: All vehicles operated by any ambulance service offering services to residents of the county shall be equipped to provide advanced life support at all times. 
(f)  Public access: All ambulance services offering services to residents of the county must not advertise or encourage the use of any other telephone number other than 9-1-1 for emergency calls. Such services must establish a local or toll-free telephone number for residents to arrange for nonemergency transportation and/or business calls. 
(g)  Zoning plan: All ambulance services offering services to residents of the county must comply at all times to the regional ambulance zoning plan. Violation of this plan shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Secs. 6-32—6-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-40. - Fees and charges (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 6-41. - Indemnification. 
Any person, firm or corporation owning or operating an ambulance service within the county shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and any resident of the county for any loss or damage resulting from the operations of the ambulance service. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
Sec. 6-42. - Penalty. 
The penalty as stated in the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, § 1-11, shall be applicable to violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1996-19, 7-2-96) 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITION AGAINST OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-43. - Purposes and legal authority. 
(a)  The health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county depend upon the availability and affordability of certain essential goods, materials, services and housing. 
(b)  During certain periods of emergency resulting from natural or manmade disaster, citizens of the county are at risk from dramatic and unjustified increases in the prices of said goods, materials, services and housing. 
(c)  Such increases in price may be excessive and unconscionable during a state of emergency and may hinder the ability of the community to recover from the disaster. 
(d)  Legislation is necessary to prohibit any person from raising prices for goods, materials, services and housing to excessive, unconscionable or unfair levels during a declared state of emergency or subsequent recovery period. 
(e)  Limitations on price overcharging during a declared emergency are authorized pursuant to the police powers of the county and O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-44. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging. Charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, suppliers, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. Defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. That period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-46. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-47. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted (March 7, 2001) but shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 7, 2001, amended the Code by adding provisions entitled "Severability" as a new § 6-47. Similar provisions are covered in § 1-7 of this Code; hence the editor has not included the provisions here. 
Sec. 6-48—6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-60. - Purposes and legal authority. 
(a)  During and following periods of emergency resulting from natural or manmade disaster, the public is at risk from unscrupulous building contractors and repair services, scams, and other unconscionable activities related to constructing, repairing, renovating and making improvements to buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster; 
(b)  Registration of building construction and repair contractors during a declared emergency, as authorized pursuant to the police powers of the county and O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-28 and 38-3-56, will provide a means to protect the public from unscrupulous and criminal building and repair contractors. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-61. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. Defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. That period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-63. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-64. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-65. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-66. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-67. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-68. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-69. - Effective date; expiration. 
This article shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted (March 7, 2001) and shall apply to all building contractors doing business in the unincorporated areas of the county on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this article and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 7, 2001, amended the Code by adding provisions entitled "Severability" as a new § 6-69. Similar provisions are covered in § 1-7 of this Code; hence the editor has not included the provisions here. 
Secs. 6-70—6-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND OTHER FORMALITIES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 6-80. - Purposes and legal authority. 
(a)  The health, safety and welfare of the citizens and property of the county may be jeopardized during an emergency, disaster or the subsequent recovery period by the inability for the local governing authority to act expediently without regard to certain formalities. 
(b)  The local governing authority of the county is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-27(b) and 38-3-28 to take actions necessary to provide for the health and safety of persons and property during periods of emergency or disaster, provided that such actions are not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or his delegatee. 
(c)  The powers and functions exercised by the local governing authority necessary to conduct the business and affairs of the county during an emergency or disaster proclaimed as such by the appropriate state official may continue without regard to compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities pursuant O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
(d)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-10-4(c)(5) and 32-4-63(6), certain formalities concerning public works contracts may be waived when necessitated by emergency. 
(e)  The county board of commissioners believes that it is desirable to have legislation in place authorizing the board to waive certain formalities and procedures as necessary in case of emergency, natural disaster or the subsequent recovery period. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-81. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof; where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-83. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the local governing authority of the county (March 7, 2001). 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 7, 2001, amended the Code by adding provisions entitled "Severability" as a new § 6-83. Similar provisions are covered in § 1-7 of this Code; hence the editor has not included the provisions here. 
Secs. 6-84—6-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 6-100. - Purposes and legal authority. 
(a)  The health, safety and welfare of the citizens and property of the county may be jeopardized during an emergency, disaster or imminent threat thereof, by the presence of looters, vandals, thieves and others who would take advantage of the confusion and devastation that accompanies such an event. 
(b)  The local governing authority of the county is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-27(b)(2) and 38-3-28 to take actions necessary to provide for the health and safety of persons and property during periods of emergency or disaster, provided that such actions are not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or his delegatee. 
(c)  The county board of commissioners believes that it is desirable to have legislation in place authorizing the board to enact a curfew when it is determined necessary to maintain order and to protect either the citizens or their property during an emergency or disaster in certain areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-101. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew. A regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media, employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to article IV of this chapter, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-103. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated county during the stated hours of curfew. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-104. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Sec. 6-105. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective upon adoption by the local governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-7-01) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 7, 2001, amended the Code by adding provisions entitled "Severability" as a new § 6-105. Similar provisions are covered in § 1-7 of this Code; hence the editor has not included the provisions here. 
Chapter 6.5 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Board of commissioners, 2-25 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; clean community ordinance, § 8-51 et seq.; zoning, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6.5-1—6.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment of November 18, 2003, amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 6.5-26—6.5—35, and adding a new art. II. Former art. II derived from an amendment of November 21, 2000. 

Sec. 6.5-26. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The Bulloch County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-27. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMP's): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel : A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission: The state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC : Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department: The state department of natural resources. 
Design professional : A professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Ogeechee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 6.5-29(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization : All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 6.5-28(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI : A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT : A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall : The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased : Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed : Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Ogeechee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. subsection 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-28. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 6.5-29(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-29. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 6.5-29(b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 6.5-29(b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 6.5-29(c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 6.5-29(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 6.5-29(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-30. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the building and zoning department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building and zoning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 6.5-30(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 6.5.29(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees (see Bulloch County Schedule of Fees and Charges), fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 6.5-29(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 6.5-30(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 6.5-29(b) and (c) of this article or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 6.5-29(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 6.5-30(b)(5) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-31. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The building department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-32. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 6.5-30(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-33. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 6.5-34. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 20 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Sec. 6.5-35. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article, as amended, shall become effective on the 19 th day of January, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 1-19-10(2)) 
Secs. 6.5-36—6.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of 7-6-99 added a new article III, sections 6.5-34—6.5-38. To allow for future expansion of article II of this chapter, sections 6.5-34—6.5-38 have been moved to 6.5-51—6.5-55 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6.5-51. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Bulloch County Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Sec. 6.5-52. - Definitions. 
(a)  Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
(b)  DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluation of pollution susceptibility.) 
(c)  Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Recharge areas are determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Hydrologic Atlas 20, Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, prepared by the department of natural resources. 
(d)  Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of natural resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
(e)  Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
(f)  Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density or lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Sec. 6.5-53. - Criteria in significant recharge areas. 
The following criteria shall apply in significant recharge areas as identified in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the unincorporated area of the county: 
(1)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in size; or 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in size. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resource conservation service. 
(3)  New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on table MT-1 of the department of human resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems ("DHR table MT-1"): 
a.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives (July 6, 1999) shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection. Any conflict between the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection and the minimum lot size requirements of the county zoning ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the provision that establishes the larger minimum lot size. 
(4)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following minimum size limitations as identified on table MT-2 of the department of human resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems ("DHR table MT-2"): 
a.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives (July 6, 1999) shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection. Any conflict between the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection and the minimum lot size requirements of the county zoning ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the provision that establishes the larger minimum lot size. 
(5)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the standards of the DHR manual and minimum lot size requirements. 
(6)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(7)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Sec. 6.5-54. - Permit requirements. 
The permitting criteria in chapter 4 of this Code shall apply in significant recharge areas as identified in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Sec. 6.5-55. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Secs. 6.5-56—6.5-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 6.5-60. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated water user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 6.5-61. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Prosecutions for violations of this article shall be in the Magistrate Court of Bulloch County. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 6.5-62. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Sec. 6.5-63. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Bulloch County. 
(Amd. of 12-7-10) 
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of April 20, 2010(1), in effect repealed the former chapter 7, §§ 7-1—7-18 and 7-36—7-41, and enacted a new chapter 7 as set out herein. The former chapter 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1995-29, adopted September 5, 1995. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; emergency management, Ch. 6; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; manufactured homes, Ch. 9; subdivision regulations, App. B; zoning, App. C. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 7-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 2, 1991. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 1, 1991. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and the water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 2, 1991 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 1, 1991 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 1, 1991. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued; provided, the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent constructions does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvements of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the building structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to correct comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equal or exceed 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully complaint with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-2. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the board of commissioners does ordain the following in this chapter. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-4. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas, by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-5. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health. 
(2)  Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects. 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and street and bridges located in floodplains. 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas. 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that the property is in a flood area. 
Sec. 7-6. - Lands to which chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas for special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-7. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 5, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 5, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Bulloch County are hereby adopted by reference. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: County commissioner office. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-8. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-9. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements, (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-10. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-11. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-12. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11; and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues, shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Bulloch County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-13. - Designation of local administrator. 
The building official or his of her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-14. - Duties and responsibilities of local administrator. 
Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities, and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(4)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 7-16(2). Verification shall be accomplished by obtaining a flood certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 7-16(2). Verification shall be accomplished by obtaining a flood certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(7)  When flood proofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 7-16(1)c. and 7-37(2) and 7-42(2). 
(8)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the building official shall make the necessary interpretation Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(11)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 7-7, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources, in order to administer the provisions of article II. 
(12)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(13)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-15. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-16. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures. 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed. 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 7-37(2). 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. 
d.  Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-17. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission, as established by the board of commissioners, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Bulloch County as provided in O.C.G.A. 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continuing designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  In reviewing such applications, the planning and zoning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-18. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
Secs. 7-19—7-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 7-36. - General standards for all areas of special flood hazard. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site water disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing buildings that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade, and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-37. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 7-36(9), "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure located in A or AE zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 7-14(6). 
(3)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (section 7-36(2)). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 7-37(3)a. and c. 
3.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-38. - Specific standards for floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(2)  Only if section 7-38(1) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-39. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 7-7, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 7-36. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 7-36(9) "elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-40. - Standards for subdivision. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein, and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-41. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 7-36(9), "elevated buildings." 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 7-16(1)c. and section 7-16(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-42. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-7, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 7-37. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Sec. 7-43. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(1)) 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulation, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; subdivision regulations, App. B; zoning, App. C. 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF HEALTH 

Sec. 8-26. - Adoption of rules, regulations. 
There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the county board of health with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety and welfare of citizens of the county. This article specifically incorporates by reference the provisions of the following rules and regulations which are in force at the time of the adoption of this article or as same may be subsequently amended: 
(1)  Rules and regulations for onsite sewage management systems adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health, being chapter 511-3-1 of the Georgia Administrative Code as supplemented by the following subparagraphs: 
a.  The provisions of section 511-3-1.03 of the aforesaid regulations are supplemented to provide that onsite sewage management permits may be issued for properties located within the flood plain as defined by 511-3-1.02 subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The soils designated to accommodate the sewage system shall be classified and mapped by a registered soil scientist. 
2.  The sewage system and soil shall meet all other federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
b.  The provisions of section 511-3-1.07 of the aforesaid regulations are supplemented to provide as follows: 
In addition to the methods approved pursuant to section 511-3-1.07(4), there shall be an approved method known as a "bed system." On level or slightly sloping topography, the bed system may be used. The provisions for this method are generally the same as for the distribution box method except for the following differences: the width of the ditch(es) will be 72 inches, and there will be two drain tile pipes in the one 72-inch trench spaced equally from each other and the trench sidewalls. All other specifications that apply to the distribution box method will be adhered to in the installation of the bed system method. 
c.  The board of health or its authorized agent may in its discretion require from any person constructing, modifying, cleaning or repairing, or entering into a contract for the construction, modification, cleaning or repairing of a private onsite sewage management system a guaranty bond in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00 executed by a bonding company licensed by the state for the faithful observance of the applicable requirements of this Code, and all state and federal laws and regulations and conditioned to protect the rights and property of any person for whom such construction, modification, cleaning or repairing may be done. A person who constructs, modifies, cleans or repairs an onsite sewage management system on premises which that person owns and occupies, or will occupy in the immediate future upon completion of such work, shall not be required to furnish a bond as set forth above. 
d.  That the On-Site Sewage Management Systems Manual, General Soil Provisions, page B-1, section 4(a) as adopted by chapter 511-3-1 of the Georgia Administrative Code be supplemented by adding the following: 
1.  Soil in its natural state with a water table of less than 18 inches shall not be considered usable soil. A lot shall not be altered by any artificial means, such as ditching or drain tiles, for the purpose of lowering the water table to meet this requirement; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the use of ditching or drain tiles for other purposes. Any approval of a lot requiring fill will be limited to a fill of not more than 30 inches. The 30-inch limitation shall apply to the average depth of the required fill in the area containing the septic tank and drain system. 
2.  The provisions of subsection 8-26(1)e.1. shall not apply to a lot that was an existing lot on or before February 2, 2010. Provided, however, that any such existing lot shall be limited to fill of not more than 36 inches. The 36-inch limitation shall apply to the average depth of the required fill in the area containing the septic tank and drain system. For purposes of this subsection 8-26(1)e.2., the term "existing lot" means (i) a lot of record that is recorded in the real estate records of the clerk of the superior court of Bulloch County; (ii) a lot shown on a preliminary plat that has been approved in accordance with the county's subdivision ordinance and for which approval has not lapsed due to the developer's failure to initiate timely development; or (iii) a lot shown on a final plat that has been approved in accordance with the county's subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Rules and regulations pertaining to food service adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-6-1 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
a.  Public display of grade card. Whenever an inspection of a permitted food service establishment is conducted by a representative of the health department, the establishment will be issued a state department of public health food service establishment inspection report to be completed and posted pursuant to state law and an alphabetical grade card based on the foregoing inspection report. The grade card must be displayed in a conspicuous place where it is readily observable by the public upon entering the facility. The owner or operator shall be responsible for keeping the grade card and inspection report posted at all times at the location designated by the environmentalist. This grade card shall remain posted until such time as the inspector conducts a subsequent inspection and removes the previous grade card and issues a new inspection report and grade card. 
(3)  Rules and regulations pertaining to tourist accommodations adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-6-2 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(4)  Rules and regulations pertaining to public swimming pools, spas, and recreational water parks adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-5 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(5)  Rules and regulations pertaining to rabies control adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-4-2 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(6)  Rules and regulations pertaining to mass gatherings adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-2 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(7)  Rules and regulations pertaining to drinking water supply adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-3 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(8)  Rules and regulations pertaining to solid waste adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-4 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(9)  Rules and regulations pertaining to the Georgia Smoke Free Air Act of 2005 adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-7 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(10)  Rules and regulations pertaining to portable sanitation contractors adopted by the state department of public health and the county board of health and being chapter 511-3-6 of the Georgia Administrative Code. 
(Ord. of 6-4-86, § I; Ord. of 9-7-93, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-93, § 1; Ord. No. 1995-8, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 1995-11, 4-4-95; Amd. of 11-7-00(1); Amd. of 1-17-06; Amd. of 9-4-07; Amd. of 2-2-10; Amd. of 1-15-13; Amd. of 8-19-14; Amd. of 6-21-16) 
Editor's note— A copy of all these rules and regulations is on file at the county board of health and in the office of the clerk of the county commission. 
State Law reference— Composition; terms of members of county board of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-2. 
Sec. 8-27. - Duties. 
The board of commissioners hereby delegates the duty of implementation and enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations referenced herein to the board of health; provided, however, that this delegation shall not prevent any other authorized county official from taking appropriate action to enforce same. 
(Ord. of 6-4-86, § II; Amd. of 1-17-06) 
Sec. 8-28. - Violations. 
(a)  Any violation of the rules and regulations referenced in this article shall be a violation of this article and shall be an offense punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violators of this chapter and all procedures for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 10, art. 4. Complaints of violation of any provision of this article may be brought before the magistrate court by a designated representative of the county board of health or other authorized county official and shall be prosecuted through that court. This method of enforcing this article and the rules and regulations referenced herein shall not be exclusive but shall be cumulative to any other method of enforcement allowed by law. 
(c)  Any failure of payment of inspection fees listed within the fee schedule adopted by the board of health and approved by the board of commissioners within 60 days of first notice, may result in suspension of permit. 
(Ord. of 6-4-86, §§ III, IV; Amd. of 1-17-06) 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 8-29. - Prohibited activity. 
Smoking is prohibited inside all areas of the main Bulloch County Courthouse building located on the second and third floors. Smoking in those portions of the first floor comprising the offices of the constitutional officers shall be controlled by written policy to be established by the respective constitutional officers designating all or any portion of their office as "No Smoking" areas. Smoking shall be allowed in the first floor hall area. 
(Ord. of 12-21-93) 
Sec. 8-30. - Signs. 
"No Smoking" signs shall be placed throughout the Courthouse building non-smoking areas in full view. 
(Ord. of 12-21-93) 
Sec. 8-31. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. 
(b)  Any county employee who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to disciplinary action as set forth under the Personnel Management Assistant, Appendix Z, Section 2.7 [of Appendix A] of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-21-93) 
Secs. 8-32—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLEAN COMMUNITY REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 6, 2007(1), enacted provisions designated as §§ 8-51—8-133, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 8-51—8-133, which pertained to the same subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted June 1, 1993, and Ord. No. 1996-6, adopted March 5, 1996. 
Cross reference— Board of health, § 8-26 et seq.; emergency management, 6-1 et seq.; solid waste collection containers, § 10-61 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-51. - General provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on the rights of others through the neglect of property by causing or allowing unsightly litter, foul odor or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from the property, or to discard, abandon or cause such on public property or others' private property. Provided however, odors generated by legitimate, commercial agricultural activities shall not be deemed to constitute a violation of this article. The provisions of the article shall apply to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this article: 
Abandoned manufactured home or Abandoned mobile home means a manufactured home or mobile home for which no valid permit has been issued by the developmental services division and which is not connected to an approved sewage system and/or is disconnected from electrical service. Provided, however, that a manufactured home or mobile home on the lot of a location that is lawfully in the manufactured home sales business shall be exempt from this definition. 
Biomedical waste means any solid waste which contains pathological waste, biological waste, cultures and stacks of infectious agents and associated biological waste, contaminated animal carcasses, including body parts, their bedding and other waste from such animals, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been contaminated. 
Building materials means any materials such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition or existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor larger than 42 cubic yards and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
County means the County of Bulloch. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Commercial waste means any waste generated by a commercial establishment. 
County manager means the chief administrative officer of Bulloch County. 
Debris means sand, dirt, broken brick, blocks, broken pavement or other similar materials suitable for fill. Said term shall not include household garbage or other types of refuse such as wood or wood products which are subject to decomposition or decay. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste or a facility, or putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant or lessee of said land or facility resides. 
Environmental manager means the county officer designated by the county manager as the person responsible for administration and enforcement of this article. 
Garbage means the by-product of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as a breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junk means any motor vehicle, machine, appliance, scrap metal or other scrap material that is in a condition which prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured. 
Junk vehicle means any wrecked or non-operable vehicle that does not bear a current license plate. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified herein. 
Loading and unloading areas means space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple unit means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one family. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. 
Person means individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash and business trash as herein defined. 
Refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with tight-fitting lids, and provided with handles and/or wheels sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles shall have a capacity of not less than 22 gallons nor more than 32 gallons and shall be kept in serviceable condition at all times. 
Scavenging means to search through trash, debris, or otherwise discarded material. 
Scrap tire means an automobile or truck tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of damage, defect or wear. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two and thirty-two hundredths of an inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original intended purpose. 
Yard trash means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery, cuttings or clippings, or other usually created as refuse in the case of trees or bushes. 
Waste means solid waste and liquid waste. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-53. - Authority, duty of the chief administrative officer. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse shall be under the supervision and control of the county manager who may delegate this authority to the environmental manager. The environmental manager shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of refuse containers, and such other matters, pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of refuse as he may find necessary and to change and modify the same. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-54. - Collection to be by county. 
Licenses . It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid waste within the county, except from his own residence or business or industrial property, without first obtaining a proper permit or license for such business operation from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Bulloch County. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-55. - Receptacles and containers required. 
It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which building materials, business trash or industrial waste is accumulated or produced to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the county collection crews or private collection agencies, adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all such waste materials which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections. The environmental manager shall determine the quantity and location of said receptacles and shall determine where said receptacle and containers are serviceable. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-56. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All receptacles and containers as required hereunder shall have said construction and design and shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacles or containers which do not conform to the provisions of this article or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents hereof or the public generally, after proper notice, has not been replaced, may be removed as refuse. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-57. - Pre-collection practices. 
(a)  Biomedical waste . No biomedical waste shall be placed in a container for collection by the county. 
(b)  Refuse . All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified herein. 
(c)  Garbage . All garbage being placed in containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid, and should be wrapped, bagged or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(d)  Household trash . All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its deposit in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. 
(e)  Injurious trash items . All waste material of an injurious nature such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(f)  Hazardous refuse and building materials . No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the county nor shall the same be collected by the county. 
(g)  Yard trash . No yard trash shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of garbage by the county nor shall the same be collected by the county except in containers so designated for yard trash. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-58. - Storing of refuse and trash. 
All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public street and private property . No person shall place any accumulations of refuse or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except as stated herein. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drain . No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into same. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations . Any accumulations of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)  Junk . It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junk motor vehicle or other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of ten days after notice of violation of this section shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the county without further notice with the reasonable costs of said removal to be paid by the owner to the environmental manager, and same shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. This shall not apply to county-approved junk dealers or county-approved establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(5)  Appliances . It shall be unlawful for any reason to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or similar device or without first removing the lock or door from said appliances, refrigerator or container unless it is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(6)  Scavenging . Scavenging from any collection container is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for any person except as fully authorized by the board of commissioners to enter, examine and sift through the contents of, or remove any matter from any collection container. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-59. - Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the unincorporated areas of the county or any waters in the unincorporated areas of the county, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by the county for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and consistent with other provisions of this division, as well as other applicable laws, ordinances and resolutions. 
(b)  In addition to the other penalties authorized by this division, in the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, public right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of sentence, and/or the court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of subsection (a) of this section, it shall establish a rebuttable presumption that the operator of the conveyance has violated this division. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section which is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, there shall be established a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this division. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials within the county to transport same without suitable covers. This subsection shall not apply to the transportation of poultry or livestock or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any refuse, building material, building material waste, cement sludge, asphalt sludge or other substances accumulated as a result of construction, repairs to existing facilities demolition of existing structures on or into any public or private road, shoulder of any public or private road or public or private ditch. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-60. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the county any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature except with the expressed permission of the owner or occupant of such automobile. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the expressed permission of the owner of the property or intended recipient. This section shall not apply to multi-page printed publications. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs for advertising material of any character on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, on any street or alley within the county. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-61. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  All commercial establishments, all multi-unit developments as defined in section 10-65 of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County and all manufactured home communities as defined by section 9-1 of the Code of Ordinance of Bulloch County, Georgia shall store their refuse in containers as specified herein so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by said establishment when and as it occurs. 
(b)  All commercial establishments shall have a bulk container unless their refuse and trash can be suitably contained in refuse receptacles approved by the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put household garbage, trash or any other waste in a commercial dumpster within the county without permission from the owner or lessee of said dumpster or the owner of the commercial establishment. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to remove any article, trash or other material from any commercial dumpster without permission from the owner. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter material from a commercial dumpster around the commercial dumpster. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-62. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and sanitary premises as directed by the environmental manager. The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall jointly and severally maintain surveillance to insure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-63. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Obligation to furnish receptacles . All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area. The environmental manager shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lots to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in an approved location as hereinabove defined. 
(b)  Obligation to use receptacles . It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers as hereinabove provided for the purpose intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot, any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-64. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash procured by those working on the site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolitions shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-65. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Bulk container . Any commercial establishment that furnishes and maintains containers suitable for handling by county equipment may be serviced by the county as herein stated, provided that said container shall be of sufficient size as specified and be approved for collection. Said containers shall at all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in a good state of repair. Service shall be discontinued to establishments failing to maintain containers appropriately. Establishments utilizing bulk containers are responsible for repairing said containers for service; no service shall be given those establishments permitting objects, obstructions or vehicles to hinder in any way the servicing of the said container. Cleaning up spilled materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant. 
(b)  Holidays . Collections shall not be made on the following holidays unless otherwise specified by the environmental manager: New Year's Day, Fourth of July, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(c)  Industrial waste . Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing same. 
(d)  Hazardous refuse . No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the county. 
(e)  Building materials . The county shall not be responsible for the collection or hauling of building materials originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new buildings, alterations or additions to existing buildings of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. Contractors shall not deposit building materials at county collection centers such as recycling centers and open or unmanned container sites, but shall transport building materials to an approved landfill or transfer station for disposal. 
(f)  No biomedical waste shall be placed in a county receptacle. 
(g)  Lawn care and landscaping waste. The county shall not be responsible for the collection or disposal of lawn care or landscaping waste generated by the activities of a lawn care or landscaping business, regardless of whether such waste is generated on residential, commercial or government property. Such waste shall be removed by the lawn care or landscaping business or by the owner of the property. Such waste shall not be deposited at county collection centers such as recycling centers and open container sites, but shall be transported by the lawn care or landscaping business or property owner to an approved landfill or transfer station for disposal. 
(h)  Commercial waste. With the exception of recyclable materials, commercial waste shall not be deposited at county collection centers such as recycling centers and open container sites, but shall be transported by the owner of the commercial establishment or his authorized agent to an approved landfill or transfer station for disposal. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-66. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse . The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for county collection. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments . No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection persons. 
(c)  Cardboard boxes and cartoons . Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(d)  Scrap and used tires . Pursuant to authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1, no person shall collect, store or transport scrap and used tires for processing or disposal in contradiction to current state law or this chapter. 
(1)  No person may store more than 100 scrap or used tires, combination of the two, except those persons specifically authorized by the foregoing cited state law. Any person, other than those specifically exempted, found storing in excess of 100 scrap or used tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and be subject to enforcement and penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Any person disposing of scrap or used tires must take the tires to either a state authorized and licensed business accepting scrap and used tires for disposal, further processing, reconditioning or recycling. Passenger vehicle tires may be disposed of at county recycling centers, provided that the same person shall not be allowed to dispose of more than six passenger vehicle tires per day at a county recycling center. Scrap and used tires may not be buried, burned, dumped or disposed of in any manner other than as outlined within this section and chapter. Any person disposing of such tires in any manner contrary to these provisions shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as provided in this chapter. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-67. - Unsecured loads. 
All persons who desire to haul refuse over the county road shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-68. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this division. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-69. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Property . All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets . No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Secs. 8-70—8-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT 

Sec. 8-81. - Nuisance designated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him. Nuisances, as contemplated herein, shall include but shall not be limited to dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy privies or stables, anything having an offensive odor, accumulations of junk, abandoned or junk vehicles, abandoned mobile homes, improper or malfunctioning septic systems, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health, life, or property of any other person; provided, however, odors generated by legitimate, commercial agricultural activities shall not be deemed to constitute a nuisance under this section. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-82. - Duty of person responsible. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any premises, including vacant lots or land, upon which trash, junk, abandoned or junk vehicles, abandoned or unsafe manufactured homes or mobile homes, garbage or miscellaneous refuse is permitted to cause to accumulate in any manner which is, or may become a nuisance, or cause injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity or may injure neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carry-out food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous refuse. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds are breeding places for insects, rodents or reptiles or is a fire hazard. 
(c)  If the person responsible for correcting the conditions named above has not acted to correct the violation after notice to him by the environmental manager, his assistants or deputies may enter upon the premises where the violation occurs and remove the trash, junk, abandoned or junk vehicles, abandoned or unsafe manufactured or mobile homes, garbage or refuse, or the grass or weeds and the county shall assess costs incurred by it, and this shall be a charge against the person responsible, and shall be a lien against the property from which the trash, garbage or refuse has been removed, or the grass or weeds have been cut. As used in this provision, the term "person responsible" means both the owner of the property where the violation occurs and, if distinct, the person or persons causing the violation, all of whom shall be jointly and severally liable for correcting any violations and for any costs incurred by the county in correcting the violations. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-83. - Enforcement, remedies and penalties for violation. 
(a)  All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of the state or any political subdivision thereof including county marshals, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of the state or any political subdivision thereof is authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this division. 
(b)  In the event that any person, firm or corporation violated any provision of this division, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(c)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this division or who shall fail to do anything required by this division shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of this Code and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Secs. 8-84—8-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 8-91. - Abandonment unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle on any public street, road or public grounds, or upon any private property, and it shall be unlawful for any person owning private property to abandon or to knowingly permit the abandonment thereupon of any motor vehicle. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-92. - Abandoned vehicles defined. 
For the purpose of this division, a motor vehicle shall be determined to have been abandoned in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  If it is partially dismantled or wrecked and it is left on a street, road, alley or sidewalk for a period of five days or longer. 
(2)  If it is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessees thereof for 48 hours or longer. 
(3)  If it is left on any public street, alley or sidewalk for seven days or longer. 
(4)  If it is partially dismantled, wrecked or incapable of self-propulsion and is left by the owner on his own property for 30 days or longer. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-93. - Removal. 
(a)  Any abandoned motor vehicle may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping by or under the direction of the sheriff's department of the county or other person, firm or corporation so designated by the county. Written notice by mail of such removal shall be promptly given to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  No abandoned vehicle shall be removed from privately owned premises without the written consent of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the same has been found by the environmental manager or his designee to be a health or safety hazard or constitutes a nuisance. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-94. - Disposition of abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  The owner of any removed abandoned vehicles, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the environmental manager all reasonable costs, incidental to the removal, storage and locating of the owner. 
(b)  Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs, or should his identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a search by the environmental manager or designated agent and after notice as herein prescribed, the stored vehicle may be sold after 20 days' notice has been given to the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicles, 20 days' notice to any lien holder of record, and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days and notice of sale has been published once a week for two weeks in the official organ of the county. 
(c)  The abandoned vehicle shall be sold in the manner set forth below. 
(d)  A vehicle of an appraised value of less than $100.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the environmental manager, including private sale. A vehicle of an appraised value of $100.00 or more shall be sold at public sale after notice as provided above, on the first Tuesday of any month in the manner and at such time as sheriff's sales are held. 
(e)  The proceeds of any sale shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county who shall pay from the proceeds of said sale of costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale, and liens in that order. If, after the sale, the ownership at the time of the removal is established satisfactorily to the clerk, the owner shall be paid so much of the proceeds as remains after the payment of the foregoing costs and liens. Otherwise, any remaining proceeds shall be forfeited and deposited in the general fund of the county. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Secs. 8-95—8-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISPOSAL SITES 

Sec. 8-111. - Use authorized; regulation. 
All domestic and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized disposal sites in accord with the directions and orders of the environmental manager or his representative in charge of operations. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-112. - Designation. 
(a)  Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through the press. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-113. - Operating hours. 
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated at such times as may be designated and posted by the environmental manager. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-114. - When use authorized; ownership of waste. 
All materials delivered and deposited for disposal on the grounds of disposal sites shall be the property of the county. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-115. - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-116. - Permit and acceptance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump, or to cause to be dumped, any waste anywhere in the unincorporated area of the county, except at an approved landfill or transfer station, or at a collection site operated by the county. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-117. - Identification; presumed evidence. 
If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of section 8-116 above can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person, firm or corporation prior to its being dumped as prohibited herein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped, or caused to be dumped, this matter and material in violation of this division. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-118. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health and to comply with all state and local permitting requirements. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-119. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The environmental manager or his designated representative or authorized representative of the department of natural resources, shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-120. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn any paper or other refuse deposited at any disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  No garbage or other materials, from which offensive odors emanate during combustion, shall be burned outside any building. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Secs. 8-121—8-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-131. - Service of warning notice. 
A warning notice may be served either on the person or business by leaving same at the residence or business of the person being notified or by certified mail. An executed certified mail receipt by the person or business being notified or the agent of such person or business shall be deemed sufficient service and notice of a warning notice. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-132. - Service of citation. 
Service of a citation for any violation of this article shall be by personal service as prescribed by state law. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Sec. 8-133. - Penalties. 
All violators of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of said violation, be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(1)) 
Secs. 8-134—8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 15, 1994, amended the Code by adding §§ 8-150, 8-160, 8-161, 8-170, 8-171, 8-180, 8-190—8-196; however, in order to provide for better classification, such new provisions were included as §§ 8-151—8-163 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 8-151. - General provisions. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby adopts and enacts this article for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the county. This article shall address the control, health and treatment of animals. 
(b)  The county may seize animals due to their being classified as dangerous dogs that cannot be secured by the owner, suspected of having rabies, being considered a nuisance despite the efforts of their owner to control their actions or having been abandoned. 
(c)  The county officials designated with authority to seize animals may destroy or order destruction of such animal if in their professional opinion the animal poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of humans, to other animals or to itself. 
(d)  The county shall be held harmless for the natural death or necessary destruction of any animal in its custody. 
(e)  Any animal seized or held by the county shall be released to the record owner after any necessary observation period. Should the record owner decide to abandon the animal, it may be released to the custody of the Statesboro/Bulloch Animal Shelter or other appropriate agency and be subject to the sterilization provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 4-14-1, et seq. 
(f)  Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, the magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violations of this article and all procedures for enforcement of this article shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. title 15, chapter 10, article 4. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-152. - Dangerous dogs. 
This article shall incorporate completely O.C.G.A. title 4, chapter 8, article 2 related to dangerous dog control. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-153. - Dog control officer. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22, the board of commissioners shall designate a dog control officer to enforce the laws of the state and this article as they relate to dangerous dogs and other animals. 
(b)  The sheriff's office, the dog control officer or other designated officers shall respond to reports from anyone of a dog biting a human and shall be empowered to immediately take custody of the dog if the owner cannot provide for the confinement of the dog to ensure it does not have access to the general public. 
(c)  The sheriff's office, the dog control officer or other designated officers may immediately take custody of the dog for observation purposes if in the officer's professional opinion the dog poses an immediate or potential threat to the health and safety of any human. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-154. - Rabies control. 
This article shall incorporate completely O.C.G.A. title 31, chapter 19 related to the control of rabies. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7, a county rabies control officer shall be appointed to administer these provisions. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-155. - Proof of vaccination, enforcement; penalties for violation. 
(a)  Every domesticated dog and cat living with its owner in the county shall be vaccinated for rabies and the owner must retain proof of such vaccination. 
(b)  On demand by the rabies control officer, dog control officer or any other recognized law enforcement officer within the county, the owner of such animal shall produce proof of current vaccination to such officer. 
(c)  Failure to produce valid documentation shall be considered a violation of this article, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and shall subject the owner to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-156. - Domestic and caged wild animals as a nuisance. 
(a)  Every owner of a domesticated animal or caged wild animal shall have a duty to keep their animal safely within their control in order to prevent such animal from being a nuisance to anyone coming into contact with the animal. 
(b)  An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Creates dangerous conditions by exhibiting threatening behavior to people; 
(2)  Directly attacks, injures or kills other domesticated animals outside the premises of its owner; 
(3)  Chases vehicles or creates unsafe conditions for drivers; or 
(4)  Causes substantial property damage to the property of another. 
This list is not exhaustive, but is designed to address the primary purpose of this section. 
(c)  The sheriff's office, the dog control officer or other designated official shall respond to calls of nuisance animals. If in the officer's professional opinion, the animal constitutes a public nuisance the officer may issue a warning citation to the owner or seize the animal if the totality of the circumstances warrant such action. Failure by the owner to reasonably abate such nuisance shall subject the owner to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-157. - Humane treatment; care of animals. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, except the animal owner, a person authorized by the owner, a licensed veterinarian or an employee, agent or a person acting pursuant to any privilege or authority granted pursuant to federal, state or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall kill any domestic animal within the county. No person shall intentionally kill any animal in any manner or by any method or means which is inhumane or which causes the animal unnecessary pain or suffering under the circumstances. 
(b)  No person shall maim any animal without justification and necessity or cause any animal to suffer any cruel treatment, to be subjected to any unnecessary pain or suffering, to suffer any unnecessary fright or to otherwise be subjected to any inhumane treatment. Customary and reasonable training methods for working and sporting and hunting animals shall not be considered inhumane treatment. 
(c)  No person shall release or abandon any animal, either alive or dead, upon any public property or upon the property of any other person. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly by neglect, omission or act allow any domestic animal to endure unnecessary pain or suffering or aid or assist in the causation of any unnecessary pain, suffering or injury by any animal. 
(e)  No person shall by neglect, omission or act leave exposed any poisonous or toxic liquid or substance in any manner that any domestic animal may come in contact. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-158. - Care of animals and birds. 
No owner or custodian of any animal or bid shall fail to provide the animal or bird with: 
(1)  Humane care; 
(2)  Adequate food and water; 
(3)  Adequate sanitary shelter which has adequate ventilation; or 
(4)  Adequate shelter from inclement weather, including extreme heat. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-159. - Hopelessly disabled animals. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article licensed veterinarians, state and local law enforcement officers or those authorized by the county to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, and all federal, state and local governmental employees while acting within the scope of their authority are empowered to induce the death of any hopelessly disabled animal by appropriate humane methods, preferably by means of euthanasia. Such officer shall be held harmless for such actions as they relate to humane destruction of any animal. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-160. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  All dead animals shall be disposed of within 12 hours of the death by the owner, agent or custodian in accordance with requirement of Georgia law and in accordance with any rules and regulations of the commissioner of agriculture, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Delivery of the deceased animal to a livestock dealer, livestock market operator, meat processing plant or rendering plant with the consent of the recipient; 
(2)  Burial of the dead animal in a sanitary manner upon premises of the owner or custodian or a third party with the prior expressed consent of the same to a sufficient depth and degree so as to prevent the exposure to scavengers with such burial to be to a level of at least three feet below ground level and with not less than three feet of compacted earth over the animal; or 
(3)  Delivery to the facility of the county maintained for such purposes with payment of all required fees. 
(b)  No person in possession or responsible of such animal carcass shall abandon the same upon any public street, any public property or any property of any other person without expressed consent. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-161. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision, the provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The eradication or control of rats, mice gophers, moles, other rodent pests, coyotes, beaver, poisonous snakes and insects and other animals and birds which have been determined by appropriate governmental officials to constitute nuisances. 
(2)  The medical, research and educational activities of legitimate medical, research and educational institutions and agencies and the employees, agents and servants of the same while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(3)  Activities of the holder of a valid hunting or fishing license in compliance with the federal and state game and fish laws. 
(4)  Employees of federal, state and local governmental entities, agencies and instrumentalities while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-162. - Forfeiture of animals for repeated violations. 
An animal seized by the county pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the same violation of this article on two or more occasions during any 24-month period of time shall be conclusively deemed to have been abandoned and forfeited by the owner. Following seizure for the 2nd such violation within any 24-month period, any animal not destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this article may be delivered to the Statesboro/Bulloch Animal Shelter or other appropriate agency. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
Sec. 8-163. - Forfeiture for inhumane treatment. 
(a)  The owner of an animal seized pursuant to this article, or for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-10 or any other statute, law or ordinance requiring humane treatment of animals, who shall plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such offense or who shall be found guilty of such offense shall be conclusively deemed to have abandoned and forfeited the animal. The animal thereafter may be delivered to the Statesboro/Bulloch Animal Shelter or other appropriate agency pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or custodian of any animal which has been seized pursuant to the provisions of this article to strictly comply with any condition, limitation, prohibition or restriction imposed with respect to the animal by the court pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be conclusively deemed to effectuate the abandonment and forfeiture of the animal by the owner or any custodian and the animal shall be seized and thereafter may be delivered to the Statesboro/Bulloch Animal Shelter or other appropriate agency pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-15-94) 
ARTICLE VI. - BODY ART STUDIOS AND ARTISTS 

Sec. 8-164. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this rule is O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71 and ch. 31-40 (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9, and chapter 31-5.) 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-165. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing tattoo and body piercing procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-166. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-167. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
Appropriate disinfectant means an EPA registered disinfectant or a 1:10 dilution of bleach and water. 
Body art studio means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license and permit from the county board of health, wherein a tattoo/body piercing artist performs tattooing or body piercing. 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individual's ear, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
Body piercing artist means any person who performs body piercing. 
County means the local county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Currently licensed health care professional includes physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the state department of human resources. 
Governing body means the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the tattoo/body piercing studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
OSHA means Occupational Safety and Health Association. 
Permit means the authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a tattoo/body piercing studio. 
Plan of correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting rules and regulations of the department of human resources. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for required length of time at 15 to 30 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-168. - Governing body. 
(a)  The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. ch. 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the county board of health, including but not limited to all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a permit, each body art studio shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(1)  Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(2)  No person shall be tattooed or pierced who appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(3)  No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying blind persons, shall be allowed in the body art studio. 
(4)  No one under the age of 18 shall be tattooed. The tattooing of a minor is prohibited in the State of Georgia. No one under the age of 18 shall be pierced without the presence and written permission of their legal guardian. No one under the age of 14 shall be pierced. 
(5)  Written report of any infection or allergic reaction resulting from the application of a tattoo or body piercing shall be forwarded to health department within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. 
(6)  Tattoo artists shall not remove an existing tattoo from a person. 
(7)  Piercing of a minor. For any piercing of a minor, a parent or legal guardian must be present to sign a consent form for each piercing procedure. It is a violation of the rules and regulations for anyone performing body piercing on an individual under age 18 without the consent of the individual's parent or guardian. Consent must specify the part of the body to be pierced. Required consent is the written and physical presence of the individual's parent or guardian and the provision of evidence stating their parental or guardian status. Proof-positive, state-issued photo identification is required from the legal guardian, and a bona fide form of identification from the minor. In the event the parent has a different last name and/or address from the child, court documentation is needed to prove the relationship, i.e., divorce papers, or a remarriage certificate. Copies of all identification for legal guardian will need to be retained in client's file. Under no circumstances is it acceptable or appropriate for an artist to perform piercing on the nipples or genitals of an individual under 18 years of age. Violation of the 'piercing of minor' procedures may result in the revocation of artist's permit, revocation of studio permit, and/or further enforcement action deemed appropriate by the health authority. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-169. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the tattoo/body piercing adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Body art studios must have adequate ventilation. 
(d)  Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering must be light in color. 
(e)  Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material that would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)  The work area shall be equipped with at least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for tattooing/piercing. This area shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels or air blower, and individual hand brushes for each artist. 
(h)  The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting. 
(i)  The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-170. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body art studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and nonabsorbent. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single use articles, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each application. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-171. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-172. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-173. - Regarding piercers jewelry. 
(a)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate jewelry is made of implant grade, high quality surgical stainless steel (316LVM series), solid 14K or 18K gold, niobium, titanium, platinum. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces that might endanger the tissues. 
(c)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-174. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure the artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)  All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc. should be removed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. 
(c)  Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the tattoo/body piercing artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands should then be dried by either an air blower or by single use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)  Single use disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)  Each artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(f)  Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed. 
(i)  Smoking and consumption of food or drink is prohibited in body art studio. 
(j)  Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-175. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each body art studio. 
(b)  Nondisposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
(1)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, dated and sealed. 
(2)  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one liner and shader tube with needle and bar inserted into tube. 
(3)  To protect needle tips from damage an appropriate sterile protective covering shall be placed on the needle tip. 
(4)  Instruments shall remain in the autoclave according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(5)  If the process begins with a hot start then instruments should be processed according to manufacturer's specifications. 
(6)  To achieve proper sterilization, temperature must reach 273 degrees Fahrenheit and 15—30 psi. 
(7)  Sterilization indicators shall be used each time and the results must be kept in a log at the location for a minimum of three years. Spore tests must be conducted at least every 30 days. 
(d)  If using pre-sterilized equipment, documentation must be on file from equipment manufacturer that describes the method of sterilization meeting the manufacturer's recommendations for storage and maintenance of sterility. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-176. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the artist shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  If an acetate stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-177. - Requirements for body piercers. 
Body piercers shall: 
(1)  Set up equipment in front of client. 
(2)  Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(3)  Pre-sterilize all new jewelry. 
(4)  Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a nonhazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(5)  Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(6)  Pre-sterilize all forceps, tubes, etc. in sealed, dated, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-178. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)  A bandage shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (non-sticking) pads. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the county health department for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. The notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-179. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each body art studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. 
The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis or more frequently if necessary, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have a likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately, or as soon as feasible. 
(3)  Studios should be free of insects, rodents and vermin. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-180. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo/body piercing procedures, shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a biohazardous waste facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1920.1030, occupational exposure to blood-borne pathogens. Record of disposal must be kept on site. 
(d)  Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers provided with tight fitting lids, to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(f)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  The containers shall be located as near as feasible to the area of use. These containers shall not be overfilled. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-181. - Personnel/operator/artist permit. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the county health department. 
(b)  The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(c)  Application for operator/artist permits shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence address; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Phone number; 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist; 
(8)  Training and or experience; 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program and first aid course given or approved by the county board of health; 
(10)  Health care provider's statement; 
(11)  Criminal history report; and 
(12)  Photograph. 
(d)  All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(e)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall be 18 years of age or older and maintain current certification in CPR first aid and have proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the county health department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations may also be submitted for consideration. 
(f)  The above certification must be obtained prior to the permit being issued. 
(g)  The artist must provide documentation by a licensed physician dated within three months prior to initial application for permit stating that the artist is free of communicable diseases that would prevent him or her from administering tattoos and/or body piercings. Artists must have letter updated every 24 months. 
(h)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all artists have completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. If the artist does not wish to obtain the Hepatitis B vaccine, a signed statement by the artist acknowledging the recommendation by the health department will suffice. 
(i)  If the applicant has been convicted of tattooing of minors in the State of Georgia, a body art studio permit and artist permit may be denied. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-182. - Client files. 
(a)  For each client, proper records of tattoos administered shall be maintained by the studio. 
(b)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, phone number, type of positive picture ID, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of the artist. 
(c)  A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. 
(d)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)  A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. 
(f)  A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-183. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each body art studio shall submit to the county health department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No studio shall be operated and no tattooing/body piercing performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county board of health. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the body art studio showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. 
(d)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the studio shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(e)  The ownership of the studio shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(f)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of body art studios shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-184. - Permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each body art studio shall obtain a valid permit from the county board of health prior to beginning operation. Every year, effective January 1 of each year, a permit must be obtained. To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable from one studio to another. 
(d)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the county board of health when the studio ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)  A studio which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county board of health pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5 including but not limited to denial or revocation of its permit by the county board of health. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Sec. 8-185. - Inspections. 
(a)  The studio and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county board of health. 
(b)  A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the county health department wherein the studio is located. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03) 
Sec. 8-186. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5. 
(b)  No person shall engage in tattooing/body piercing except in a licensed studio. All tattoo artists must have an operator permit. No tattoo studio shall be operated without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. ch. 31-40. 
(c)  The county board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art studio that does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the county board as provided in O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5, art. 1. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(d)  The county board of health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, or of the rules and regulations. 
(Amd. of 11-18-03; Amd. of 7-1-08) 
Chapter 9 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The editor has treated Amd. of April 5, 2005 as repealing chapter 9, sections 9-1—9-9, 9-31—9-39, 9-56—9-61, 9-81—9-84, in its entirety and replacing it with a new chapter 9, sections 9-1—9-6, 9-31—9-33. Former chapter 9 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 1991-3, §§ I—XIV, adopted Feb. 19, 1991. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a difference meaning: 
Board of commissioners: Bulloch County Board of Commissioners. 
Building official : One or more persons, officers or officials or his/her authorized representative, whom the county manager has appointed to administer and enforce, individually or collectively, the building code, subdivision, manufactured home, and zoning ordinances. 
County : Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Developmental services division : The division which includes the building and zoning departments. 
Driveway : A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians for access from any street or road to a manufactured home. 
Health department : The director of the Bulloch County Health Department or his/her authorized representative. 
Manufactured home : A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. ("the HUD Code"). 
(1)  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of two feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, except that any such home for which a building permit was applied prior to the adoption of the zoning ordinance (November 4, 1994) may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this chapter with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the aforesaid building permit. Galvanized metal roofing allowed in the AG-5, commercial, and MHP districts only. 
(2)  The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(3)  The tongue, axles, transporting lights and towing apparatus shall be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. The tongue and axle may remain in AG-5, commercial and MHP districts. 
(4)  Two or more manufactured homes may not be joined together and utilized as a single residence. 
Mobile home : A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. (Ga. L. 1968, p. 415, § 2; Ga. L. 1973, p. 4, § 2; Code 1981, § 8-2-131; Ga. L. 1982, p. 1376, §§ 3, 7; Ga. L. 1989, p. 14, § 8; Ga. L. 1992, p. 2750, § 1.). 
Permit : A written permit of certification issued by the Developmental Services Division permitting a manufactured home to be located on a parcel of land. 
Person : Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation. 
Pre-owned manufactured home : Any manufactured home that has been previously utilized. 
Skirting : A durable material used to enclose the space from the bottom of the manufactured home to grade. Acceptable materials may include brick, masonry, stone, rock, wood, metal (non reflective), vinyl and other materials manufactured for the purpose of skirting. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-2. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-3. - Liability. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the municipal, county, or state authority any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property caused by any defect in any piping or appliance, or by installation thereof. Nor shall the county or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-4. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  The building official shall in writing order all further work stopped when by reason of defective or illegal work, a provision or requirement of this chapter is being violated. The building official may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision, requirement, term or condition of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Any violation of any provisions, requirement, term or condition of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance; and any person aggrieved thereby may abate the same, or the same may be abated as a public nuisance. Continuous violation may be restrained in a court of equity having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-5. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Exemption of units held for resale . If the owner of a manufactured home is using or intends to use such manufactured home for the purpose of resale only, then such manufactured home shall be exempt from obtaining a permit provided the manufactured home is placed on property permitted for manufactured home sales and service or prior permission has been given by the developmental services division. 
(b)  Finding of necessity . The board of commissioners finds and determines that manufactured homes pose special problems in determining whether these homes are located on approved sites and comply with the plumbing and electrical hookups adopted by the county. Thus, it is necessary to require certain permits to insure that the homes are properly identified and located on approved sites in compliance with such codes. 
(c)  Prerequisites to locating or occupying manufactured home. 
(1)  No person shall initially locate or relocate any manufactured home within the limits of the county without having made such application and obtained such permit. 
(2)  No person shall occupy any manufactured home as a residence unless a permit has been issued as required by this section. 
(3)  Installers of manufactured homes are responsible for complying with all local requirements and assuring that a permit has been obtained prior to the installation of any manufactured home. 
(4)  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. Manufactured homes are not to be stored or abandoned on the property for more than 60 days, except in a location that is in the manufactured home sales businesses. For purposes of this provision, a manufactured home shall be considered "stored" or "abandoned" if it does not meet all the requirements of sections 9-31 and 9-32. 
(d)  Pre-owned manufactured home. 
(1)  No permit will be issued for a mobile home as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  A non-permitted safety and aesthetic inspection (subsection 9-5(e)) shall be performed on all pre-owned manufactured homes located within the county prior to issuance of a permit. 
(3)  Applicants for pre-owned manufactured homes not located in Bulloch County shall be given a copy of the required safety and aesthetic standards (subsection 9-5(e)) and provide to the developmental services division photographs that show these standards have been met prior to issuing a permit. Once the manufactured home has been brought into the county, an inspection shall be made to ensure the manufactured home meets these standards at the installation inspection. If the manufactured home does not meet these standards according to the building inspector, power will not be approved until the standards have been met. 
(e)  Safety and aesthetic standards for pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(1)  Exterior walls. The exterior shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(2)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portions of the structure. The roof shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(3)  Windows, doors, and frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. Every bedroom shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(4)  Plumbing facilities and fixtures. The owner of the occupied structure or a designated agent shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with the HUD Code. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities. Every residential unit shall contain a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition. 
(f)  Application for permit. 
(1)  The developmental services division is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe forms and procedures for such applications for permits issued pursuant thereto, as well as any other document required in connection with such application or permit. The developmental services division is authorized or empowered to require that applicants furnish information in writing, as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes hereof. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application for the location or relocation of a manufactured home, the developmental services division shall determine whether or not the site has been approved. If the location or proposed location of the manufactured home has not been approved by the developmental services division, the application shall be denied. 
(3)  No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of the zoning ordinance. If an applicant for a building permit is, at the time of such an application, determined by the zoning administrator to be in violation of the zoning ordinance, then the building official will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant voluntarily removes or changes the cause of the violation and ceases to be in violation. The applicant must notify the building official that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the zoning administrator as to the violation. When the applicant has ceased to be in violation of this chapter, the building official will then accept the application for building permit. 
(g)  Permit fee. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for the issuance of each permit will be paid by the owner of a manufactured home to the developmental services division when issued. Failure to obtain the permit as provided herein shall result in the fee being doubled. 
(h)  Sewage disposal system. No person shall initially locate any manufactured home or relocate any manufactured home within the limits of the county unless an existing on-site sewage management system approved by the county health department is present or an on-site sewage management system permit has been issued by the county health department for the proposed mobile home site. An applicant for the location or relocation of a manufactured home within the limits of the county shall present to the developmental services division a letter, or other clearance from the county health department, stating that such an approved on-site sewage management system has been properly installed and connected; or, stating that an on-site sewage management system permit has been issued by the county health department and satisfactory proof has been furnished to the county health department that such an approved sewage system will be properly installed and connected. The developmental services division shall not issue such permit authorizing the location or relocation of such manufactured home unless such letter or other clearance from the county health department is presented to it. 
(i)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  All permits issued under the terms of this division shall indicate the date issued. Any permits issued hereunder shall be valid only for the specified manufactured home and for the location of such manufactured home as indicated on the permit. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall be so construed as to relieve any person from the responsibility of obtaining a relocation permit each time such person moves or relocates a manufactured home. 
(3)  Permits shall be valid for 90 days. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  The developmental services division is charged with inspecting manufactured homes to ensure compliance with local and state guidelines. Inspections shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Safety and aesthetic inspection shall be performed on pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(2)  Site inspection shall be performed on each site prior to placement of the manufactured home. 
(3)  Installation inspection shall be performed before the power company has connected service to the home. 
(4)  Skirting shall be performed thirty days after the installation inspection to assure that skirting, landings and handrails are in place. 
(b)  To the extent possible, inspections will be scheduled within 48 hours; excluding Saturday, Sunday and county-observed holidays. 
(c)  Upon completion of the installation inspection, and if the manufactured home is in compliance with this chapter, the developmental services division shall notify the power company to connect the electrical service to the home. 
(d)  If a manufactured home fails an inspection, the permit holder or his agent will be notified. Prior to a reinspection, a reinspection fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, shall be paid to the developmental services division. 
(e)  No manufactured home shall be occupied prior to the installation inspection being done and approved. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Secs. 9-7—9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 9-31. - Setup standards. 
(a)  Tiedowns. Each manufactured home shall have tie downs or other devices used to secure the manufactured home based on the requirements of the current state adopted building codes or manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(b)  Foundations. Foundations shall be installed in accordance with the standards set forth in the current state adopted building codes or manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(c)  Steps and landings. Steps and/or landings are required for all homes, at all doors, and shall be constructed to the current state adopted building codes. The handrails and landings must be in place within 30 days after the approval of the installation inspection to the manufactured home. 
(d)  Skirting. Skirting, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and construction of materials manufactured for such purposes, which have been approved by the building inspector, shall be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. The skirting must be in place within 30 days after the approval of the installation inspection to the manufactured home. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-32. - Water, sewer, electrical, refuse disposal services. 
(a)  Water supply. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided for the manufactured home. The source of water supply shall be approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or the health department. 
(b)  Sewage disposal. An adequate and safe sewage disposal system shall be provided for the manufactured home. Collection systems, sewage treatment facilities or individual septic tank systems shall be approved by the health department. 
(c)  Refuse. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse for the manufactured home shall be so conducted as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, or insect breeding areas. 
(d)  Electrical equipment and installation . Lot/sites shall have all equipment and installations designed, constructed and maintained in compliance with the state minimum standard code. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Sec. 9-33. - General safety and aesthetic standards. 
(a)  All manufactured homes and mobile homes shall meet the following minimum standards. 
(1)  Responsibility. The owner and/or occupant of the property shall maintain all structures and properties in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which does not comply with the requirements of these standards. 
(2)  Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition that it does not threaten the integrity of the structure. 
(3)  Exterior walls. The exterior shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(4)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portions of the structure. The roof shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(5)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposing loads. 
(6)  Windows, doors, and frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. Every bedroom shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(7)  Skirting. Skirting, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and construction of materials manufactured for such purposes, which have been approved by the building official, shall be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Exception for property located on a river or those approved by the building inspector. 
(8)  Plumbing facilities and fixtures. The owner of the occupied structure or a designated agent shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with the HUD code. A person shall not occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with these standards. 
(9)  Sanitary facilities. Every residential unit shall contain a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
(b)  Unsafe systems, appliances or equipment. 
(1)  Manufactured homes, appliances, or equipment covered by this chapter that may be, or shall be found upon inspection, to have become dangerous or unsafe shall be removed or discontinued from use, unless made safe and so certified by the building official. 
(2)  The term "dangerous or unsafe manufactured homes, systems, appliances or equipment," shall include manufactured homes, systems, appliances or equipment that are: structurally unsafe, unstable or unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use to which they are put; constituting a hazard to health or safety due to inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence; or otherwise dangerous to life or property. 
(c)  Notice of unsafe manufactured homes, systems, appliances or equipment. 
(1)  Upon receipt of information that manufactured homes, systems, appliances or pieces of equipment covered by this chapter are unsafe, the building official shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection. If found that an unsafe condition exists, he/she shall serve, or cause to be served, on the owner (or someone of the owner's, executor's, administrator's, agent's, or lessee's employ, or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same), a written notice containing a description of the particulars in which the manufactured home, systems, appliances or equipment are unsafe; and an order requiring the same to be made safe, as may be deemed necessary by the building official. 
(2)  If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice and order shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person. A copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate notice. 
(d)  Disregard of notice. If the person served with a notice or order to remove an existing unsafe condition, or discontinue the use of same, fails to comply within a reasonable time as set by the building official, the building official shall advise the county (or the proper prosecuting authority) of all the facts in the case and institute an appropriate action in the courts to compel compliance. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(2)) 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Violation of ordinances of counties, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60; Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; authorization to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the ordinance of 2-18-74 pertaining to the collection and disposal of abandoned vehicles, appliances and junk are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Sec. 10-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(8)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming. 
(9)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(10)  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aids or abets therein. 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets. 
(12)  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(13)  Acts in a dangerous manner toward others. 
(14)  Uses fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(15)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(16)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(17)  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority. 
(18)  Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise. 
(19)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(20)  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property within the county. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(21)  Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or not on any public or private parking lot within the limits of the county, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of beer or wine. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(b)  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Secs. 10-3—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MISUSE AND DESTRUCTION OF COUNTY PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the county signs, county collection containers and other properties ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, §§ 1.01, 2.01) 
Secs. 10-27—10-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICIAL SIGNS AND NOTICES 

Sec. 10-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Signs and other properties means any official sign and notice maintained by and owned by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 1.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-42. - Administration and enforcement. 
The sheriff or his designated representative is hereby granted and shall hereafter have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the preservation and maintenance of county signs and other properties in the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 1.03) 
Sec. 10-43. - Destroying, damaging, defacing. 
In order to properly maintain the signs and other property throughout the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the safety of persons in the county, it shall be unlawful and in violation of this section for any person to remove, destroy, damage, deface or have in their possession any sign or other property maintained or owned by the county; provided however, county employees charged with the responsibility for the erection and maintenance of county signs shall not be deemed in violation of this section by having possession of county signs while acting in the scope of their employment. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 1.04; Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 10-44. - Violations; remedies. 
(a)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this division as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this division as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, is hereby declared to be in violation of this division and the regulations herein set forth by the county, punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. The maximum punishment for the violation of this division shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  The remedies herein set out for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division shall not be deemed to be inclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 1.05) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 10-45—10-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COUNTY COLLECTION CONTAINERS 

Sec. 10-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection area means an area provided or designated by the county to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste or for the location of collection containers. 
Collection container means a container provided by the county and placed in the unincorporated area thereof to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-61. - Purpose. 
In order to govern and police the unincorporated area of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens thereof, the garbage and solid waste disposal regulations in this division are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04) 
Sec. 10-62. - Administration and enforcement. 
The sheriff or his designated representative is hereby granted and shall hereafter have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this division for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste in the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.03) 
Sec. 10-63. - Acceptable waste. 
The county has placed garbage and solid waste collection containers in several locations or collection areas and the county may from time to time hereafter provide other such collection containers and collection areas in the unincorporated areas of the county, and only household garbage or solid waste, domestic kitchen refuse and discarded food, beverages and beverage containers, newspapers, publications, clothing, wearing apparel and discarded wrappings or containers, and such other household and nonhousehold items sufficiently small in size as to not impair the intended use and maintenance of the collection containers, may be dumped or placed in such garbage and solid waste containers as provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(a)) 
Sec. 10-64. - Placement of items within containers. 
Items shall be dumped or placed inside the collection containers located at the collection areas. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division to do the following: 
(1)  To dump or place any item outside or around collection containers or in the collection area; or 
(2)  To throw or cast away any waste paper, rubbish, trash, filth, litter or garbage of any character into areas open to the public, including the streets, lanes or thoroughfares of the county, and driveways, parking lots and public spaces of multi-unit housing developments or other property. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(b); Ord. of 10-6-92) 
Sec. 10-65. - Providing space for containers. 
(a)  The developer, owner, association and/or manager of a multi-unit development consisting of 10 or more units shall provide a suitable, accessible space for the location of a county collection container for the use of the occupants of those units within 30 days from receiving notice from the county manager of his designee that the presence of garbage in the area of the development has created a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Anyone who has been so notified shall have a right to appeal to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners within five days of the notice. The board of commissioners shall set a time and place for a hearing to be held not less than five or more than 20 days after the receipt of the written appeal. The hearing shall be informal and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. All testimony shall be under oath. A majority vote of the members of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. of 10-6-92) 
Sec. 10-66. - Dumping unacceptable items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division to dump, place or leave any other items, property or matter at any garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container at any collection area except as provided in section 10-64. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division to dump, place or leave bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheetrock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, roots, dead animals, appliances, equipment, bed springs, mattresses, furniture, fixtures, motors, engines, chemical wastes, industrial or commercial supplies, and inorganic solid material of any type or kind except as authorized in section 10-64 at any garbage or solid waste collection area or in any collection container; provided however, that certain of the above unacceptable items may be received at designated county solid waste collection and recycling centers as may be established by the county manager and pursuant to regulations regarding the use of said centers as may be promulgated by the county environmental manager. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(c), (d); Ord. of 6-1-93, § 1) 
Sec. 10-67. - Scavenging. 
Scavenging from any collection container is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful and in violation of this division for any person except as fully authorized by the board of commissioners to enter, examine, and sift through the contents of or remove any matter from any collection container. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(e)) 
Sec. 10-68. - Burning, otherwise damaging containers. 
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division to set any fire, to allow a fire to continue to burn, or in any other way attempt to damage or destroy the garbage and solid waste collection containers provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(f)) 
Sec. 10-69. - Use by nonresidents. 
The placement of garbage and solid waste collection containers in several locations or collection areas is for the convenience and use, in accordance with the provisions of this division, of county residents only. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division for any person to dump, place or leave any item at such garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container unless such person is a resident of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(g)) 
Sec. 10-70. - Dumping by commercial collectors. 
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division for any person engaged in the business of any type of garbage and solid waste collection to dump, place or leave garbage and solid waste collected in the conduct of business at any garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.04(h)) 
Sec. 10-71. - Violations, remedies. 
(a)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this division as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this division as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, is hereby declared to be in violation of this division and the regulations herein set forth by the county, punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. The maximum punishment for the violation of this division shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  The remedies herein set out for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division shall not be deemed to be inclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-18-84, § 2.05) 
Secs. 10-72—10-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 

Sec. 10-86. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "prohibition against discharging firearms near residences and places of business ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.01, 10-18-88) 
Sec. 10-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any building or enclosure in which any type business is operated. 
Firearms includes any pistol, rifle, shotgun or other type of firearm. 
Residence means any place which is inhabited by human beings. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.02, 10-18-88) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-88. - Administration and enforcement. 
The sheriff or his designated representative is hereby granted and shall hereafter have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.03, 10-18-88) 
Sec. 10-89. - Discharging near residence or business. 
In order to protect and preserve the safety of persons in the county and to prevent the disturbances of those persons living in or operating a business within the county, it shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for a person to discharge a firearm in all unincorporated areas of the county within 250 feet of any residence or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.04, 10-18-88; Ord. of 11-15-88, § 1.04) 
Sec. 10-90. - Hours of use restricted. 
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this article to discharge a firearm in any unincorporated area of the county between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 30 minutes before sunrise on the following day. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 1.04) 
Sec. 10-91. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons who fire or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; 
(3)  Persons engaged in hunting raccoons, opossums, foxes or bobcats at night. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.04, 10-18-88; Ord. of 11-15-88, § 1.04) 
Sec. 10-92. - Violations, remedies. 
(a)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended is hereby declared to be in violation of this article and the regulations herein set forth by the county, the same being punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. The maximum punishment for the violation of this article shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  The remedies herein set out for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to be inclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 1.05, 10-18-88) 
Secs. 10-93—10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKYARDS, SALVAGE YARDS AND USED AUTO PARTS YARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, Ch. 8, Art. III, Div. 3. 

Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fence means a structure of sufficient height, strength and substance to block the view of the contents of one of the yards defined herein from public streets, highways and adjacent residential and commercial areas. 
Greenbelt means a barrier of trees, shrubbery or other vegetation of sufficient height and density to block the view of the contents of one of the yards defined herein from public streets, highways and adjacent residential and commercial areas. 
Junk means any motor vehicle, machine, appliance, scrap metal or other scrap material that is in a condition which prevents its use for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured. 
Junkyard, salvage yard or used auto yard means the use of any space, whether inside or outside a building for the storage, keeping, salvage or sale, buying, exchange, bailing or cleaning of junk, scrap, salvage or discarded metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, used vehicles or equipment, used or pre-owned mobile homes, waste or other scrap materials, including the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of one or more automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Wrecked vehicle compound means a place of storage of disabled motor vehicles which do not meet the definition of "junk" and which are being stored for the purpose of repairs and/or restoration to the purpose for which they were manufactured. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1.1) 
Sec. 10-102. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall govern the use of property for the operation of junkyards, salvage yards, used auto parts yards and automobile repair businesses within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1.2) 
Sec. 10-103. - Screening of junkyards, salvage yards and used auto parts yards. 
(a)  Fences and greenbelts shall be used to shield and secure contents of junkyards, salvage yards and used auto parts yards from access to and view from public streets and highway and/or adjacent residential and commercial areas. Fences shall be constructed and maintained around the entire boundary of such yards. Fences and greenbelts shall not be less than six feet in height and shall be of such greater height and be constructed in such a manner and subject to specifications as specified by the county environmental manager to insure aesthetic quality and reasonable security. 
(b)  No items for sale shall be stored or displayed on the fence or outside of the fenced or greenbelt area. 
(c)  Wrecked motor vehicles shall be stored in a "wrecked vehicle compound". Such a compound shall be protected from view in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  The environmental manager shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the establishment of specifications and adoption of regulations consistent with this chapter for all fencing and/or greenbelts used to shield said yards from view. For all new businesses, written approval of the environmental manager for the proposed screening devise, whether fence, greenbelt or both, shall be required prior to the commencement of operation of any such yard. Existing businesses shall have six months to complete installation and construction from the date of the approval order of the environmental manager specifying the type fence and/or greenbelt that will be required to comply with the terms of this article. Provided however, if extenuating circumstances are shown, the environmental manager shall have the authority, within his discretion, to extend the period for compliance for an additional six months. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1.3) 
Sec. 10-104. - Automobile repair business. 
(a)  An automobile repair business that stores automobiles on its premises for a period of less than 30 days, during which time the automobiles are being repaired, shall not be required to comply with the regulations in section 10-103(a). An automobile repair business that stores automobiles on its premises for periods in excess of 30 days shall fence and screen the areas where the automobiles are stored in accordance with the requirements of section 10-103(a). 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1.4) 
Sec. 10-105. - Nuisance declared. 
Any yard as defined herein which is not in compliance with this article is hereby declared to be a public and private nuisance subject to all remedies and penalties provided in this Code and all other legal and equitable remedies to which nuisances are subject to pursuant to local and state law. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1.5) 
Secs. 10-106—10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TIMBER HARVEST ACTIVITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 16, 1994 did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as §§ 10-121—10-125 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-121. - Purpose. 
An ordinance adopting a standard procedure to require notice of timber harvest activities in the county; providing a penalty for a violation thereof; and providing for enforcement of this article, all to insure compliance with the relevant state statutes for the assessment of standing timber, and the regulations promulgated thereunder; and for the monitoring of timber harvest activities so as to promote fair and efficient collection of the ad valorem tax on standing timber. 
(Ord. of 8-16-94, § 1) 
Sec. 10-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Start up means either the moving in of timber cutting equipment onto a tract of land from which timber will be cut or the actual cutting of any trees on such tract of land. 
Tax assessor means the tax assessor of the county. 
Timber harvesting activity means any activity which involves the cutting, harvesting or other removal of timber from lands within the county, pursuant to a contract, memorandum of understanding or other form of agreement or arrangement with the owner or purchaser of the timber. 
Timber harvesting contractor means the individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or any other group or combination acting as a unit, engaged in the business of cutting or harvesting timber, or which cuts or harvests timber, pursuant to a contract, memorandum of understanding or other form of agreement or arrangement with the owner or purchaser of the timber with respect to a tract of land in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-16-94. § 2) 
Sec. 10-123. - Jurisdiction. 
The requirements of this article shall govern all timber standing within the area of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-16-94. § 3) 
Sec. 10-124. - Notification of harvesting. 
(a)  The timber harvesting contractor shall notify the tax assessor prior to the start up of any timber harvesting activity with respect to a tract of land in the county, on a form provided by such tax assessor. 
(b)  Upon completion of the timber harvesting activities identified on the form notification to the tax assessor, the timber harvesting contractor shall give notification of such completion, either verbally or in writing, to the tax assessor. 
(Ord. of 8-16-94. § 4) 
Sec. 10-125. - Violations. 
(a)  Any timber harvesting contractor violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each timber harvesting activity for which any violation of any provision of this article is committed by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax assessor shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article, including the issuance of a citation to appear before the magistrate court of the county to answer charges of violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-16-94. § 5) 
Secs. 10-126—10-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 10-135. - Policy and purpose; applicability. 
(a)  It is declared to be the public policy and purpose of the county board of commissioners to utilize its police powers to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of this county. The board of commissioners recognizes that its citizens derive numerous economic and personal benefits from the use of devices that emit noises. There are, nonetheless, measurable damages and injuries to the environment and to the public health which may be directly attributable to loud, unnecessary, or unusually disturbing sound or noise which has a detrimental effect on the health and welfare of the citizenry and an individual's right to peaceful and quiet enjoyment. Accordingly, the board of commissioners finds that this article is necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the citizens of Bulloch County. However, nothing in this article is intended to deter individuals from lawfully exercising the individual right to freedom of speech or any other freedom guaranteed under the Constitutions of the United States of America or of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply in the unincorporated areas of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Sec. 10-136. - Prohibited noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which either disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person, and which is audible to such person from a distance of 100 feet or more from the point of origin of the sound or noise. A reasonable person is defined as a person of ordinary sensibilities with normal hearing ability. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Sec. 10-137. - Specific prohibitions. 
(a)  In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article; provided, however, these enumerations shall not be deemed exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape recorder, compact disc player, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of a reasonable person, or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of a reasonable person who is in the room, vehicle, chamber, or immediate vicinity in which the machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, recorder, compact disc player, or other machine or device any day between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, vehicle, chamber, or immediate vicinity in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly any day between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person in any office, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence or of any reasonable person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger upon request of proper county authorities. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. The use of special or modified standard equipment exhaust devices on automotive vehicles to increase or modify the sound emitted by the exhaust is prohibited. 
(6)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(7)  Loading, unloading and opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(8)  Schools, courts, places of worship and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship, or court, while in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital. 
(9)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of any reasonable person in the neighborhood. 
(10)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise. 
(11)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers when used at such an unreasonably loud volume so as to unreasonably disturb a reasonable person in his or her residence, offices, schools, hospitals, churches, or courts. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(12)  Aircraft. Noises associated with the takeoffs and landings of aircraft unless such takeoffs and landings take place on an authorized airport or other landing field, heliport or helipad located within a properly zoned district and in accordance with other applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Sec. 10-138. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises do not include noise or sound generated by the following: 
(1)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls. 
(2)  Radios, sirens, horns and bells on any emergency response vehicle. 
(3)  Activities on or in county and school athletic facilities and on or in publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent. 
(4)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
(5)  Religious worship activities, including but not limited to bells and organs, as long as such noise, because of its volume level, duration and character does not annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(6)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment. 
(7)  Aircraft-related noises associated with aircraft while in flight and while under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense. Also, aircraft-related noises associated with the takeoffs and landings of aircraft with technical difficulties, in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control, or being operated in accordance with a declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations. 
(8)  The operation of lawn mowers, edgers, trimmers, blowers, power-driven hedge shears, and other domestic power-operated equipment when operated with a properly functioning muffler meeting manufacturer's standards, and when such operation is between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(9)  Operation of watercraft upon any watercourse, lake, river, or swamp when operated in accordance with Georgia laws. 
(10)  Noise created during the ordinary course of operating lawfully permitted industrial businesses in industrial zoning classifications, or during the ordinary course of operating industrial businesses that have a vested right to continue operating in any other zoning classification. Noise that is not directly related to the industrial component of the business's operation and that otherwise violates this article shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(11)  Noise created during the ordinary course of operating agricultural operations or facilities that are lawfully permitted in agricultural zoning classifications, or during the ordinary course of operating agricultural operations or facilities that have a vested right to continue operating in any other zoning classification. Noise that is not directly related to the agricultural component of the agricultural operation or facility and that otherwise violates this article shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(12)  The operation of tow trucks while assisting motorists or towing disabled vehicles. 
(13)  Noises resulting from activities of a temporary duration (such as but not limited to parades, fireworks displays, and other special events) for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conform to the conditions and limitations stated thereon. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Special permits. 
(a)  The developmental services division is authorized to issue permits authorizing the conduct of activities otherwise prohibited by this article as follows: 
(1)  To persons who have applied in writing for such permits, on forms provided for this purpose, at least 21 days prior to the date for which such authorization is requested, and who have paid an administrative fee in accordance with the county's schedule of fees and charges at the time of submitting their applications. All permits issued shall state all conditions which, in the judgment of the developmental services division, are necessary to minimize the adverse impact of noise activities on residential or other noise-sensitive areas, including but not limited to naming an effective date, time of day, location and use of equipment permitted. In the case of construction activities, no such permit shall be valid for more than 45 consecutive days, provided that the developmental services division is further authorized to renew such permits upon subsequent applications accompanied by a showing that the grounds for issuance still exist. The developmental services division is authorized to issue such permits if the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated the following: 
(A)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration, and cannot be conducted in compliance with the provisions of this article and no reasonable alternative is available; 
(B)  The applicant requires additional time to alter or modify the activity to comply with the provisions of this article, and no reasonable alternative is available; or 
(C)  The activity is being conducted for a public purpose by, or at the direction of, a governmental entity. 
(2)  To persons conducting activities in response to an emergency, when the circumstances constituting such emergency have been shown to the reasonable satisfaction of the developmental services division, for a period of time which, in the judgment of the developmental services division, is sufficient to remedy the emergency conditions. Such permits may be issued with an effective date retroactive to the initiation of the activity, and the administrative fee otherwise required may be waived. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Sec. 10-140. - Violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Amend. of 11-6-07(2)) 
Chapter 11.5 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Development authority, § 2-106; buildings, § 4-1 et seq.; road naming and property numbering, § 4-76 et sq.; flood damage prevention, § 7-1 et seq.; highway signs, § 11-26 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, § 13-1; subdivision regulations, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11.5-1—11.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 11.5-26. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Bulloch County Public Road Right-of-Way Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § I; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-27. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
County means Bulloch County or any division, department, agency, authority, instrumentality or branch thereof, having charge of the public roads of the county. 
County Engineer means the County Engineer of Bulloch County, a position hired by the county manager. 
County road means the donation by the owner, either expressly or implied, and acceptance by Bulloch County for public street purposes, in accordance with the statutory or common law provision. 
Excavate or alter means the ditching, digging or penetrating in any way into the bed or surface of any county road herein defined. 
Obstruct means the placing of a barrier upon any public county road as herein defined or engaging in any work or activity which will interfere with the normal flow or passage of traffic upon the county road. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or private organization of any character. 
Private road means a privately owned road or way, which is only open for the benefit of one or more individuals and not dedicated to the use of the general public, or a road which lies on privately owned land. 
Right-of-way means a general term denoting land, property or interest therein, usually but not required to be a strip, acquired for or devoted to a county road. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § II; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-28. - Authority and enactment. 
The Georgia Code of Public Transportation Act of 1973, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 grants authority to the governing body of each county to regulate the county system. The chairman and board of commissioners, pursuant to the authority conferred above, does ordain and enact this article into law. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § III; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-29. - Jurisdiction and application. 
The jurisdiction of this article shall apply to all publicly maintained roads, streets and highways in the unincorporated areas within the boundaries of the county, and includes sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, drainage inlets, manholes, water valves, and survey benchmarks, except private roads and those roads, streets and highways which are part of the state highway system. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § IV; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-30. - Permit/unlawful conduct. 
(a)  The following conduct is hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without a permit issued by the county, to purposely obstruct any public road, street, sidewalk or other public passage in such a way as to render it impassable to the public without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard when such person fails or refuses to remove the obstruction after receiving an official request from the board of commissioners or the order of a peace officer that he do so within a specified period of time. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly, intentionally and without authority, block or attempt to block, or cause to be blocked, prevent or attempt to prevent, or interfere or attempt to interfere with, any member or members of the public from gaining access to or egress from a public or private property via any owned or dedicated, open or unopened, public street, public roadway, public alley or public easement by placing or causing to be placed thereon, or by maintaining or causing to be maintained thereon, any impediment, obstruction or deterrent of any kind or shape, natural or manmade, designed and intended to discourage or prevent public use of the same. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without a permit issued by the county, to purposely excavate or alter the surface, shoulders or sides of any public road, street, sidewalk or other public passage. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected within the right of way of any public road, street, sidewalk or public passage any sign, notice, warning or symbol designed or intended to discourage the use of such public passage by the public. 
(5)  In order to aid in the proper drainage of water and prevent erosion on the public roadways of this county, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct within a public right-of-way a private road or driveway for ingress and egress onto one's property without first obtaining a permit through the office of the county manager or his designee and paying such fees as may be required for the purchase and installation of concrete pipe as necessary to ensure the unobstructed flow and drainage of water within such public rights-of-way. The provisions of this subsection may be waived in such circumstances where the county engineer or transportation director deems that the installation of such pipe is not necessary to achieve the purpose of this subsection. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform work on the county right-of-way without an active Georgia Utility Protection Locate Ticket Number, as applicable. This locate ticket number must be available upon request from a county employee. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of a current Bulloch County right-of-way permit to perform work outside of the permitted area as stated on the permit. Work outside the permitted area may result in a stop work order issued by the county official during inspection and/or a citation issued by a county code enforcement officer or Bulloch County Sheriff's Officer, which citation is returnable to magistrate court. 
(b)  The county, through its agents and employees, whenever any such as is prohibited herein occurs, may enter upon any such public street, public roadway, public alley or public easement and take necessary action to effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § V; Ord. of 10-18-94; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-31. - Standards. 
The person conducting and/or contracting for any excavation, construction or alteration work authorized by this article and a permit issued by the county shall perform according to the following standards: 
(1)  Safety precautions, including signage and flagman, shall be implemented and shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, issued by the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT). 
(2)  All roadbed and surface repairs shall be made in accordance with current standards established by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Any other policies, standards or special requirements that are deemed as necessary to secure, protect and preserve the public way according to county standards may be directed by the county engineer. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § VI; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-32. - Application; site inspection; fee. 
(a)  As a condition precedent to the granting of such permit, such applicant shall file an application in writing with the county engineer specifically describing the nature, extent, location and time of proposed obstruction, excavation or alteration and such other information as the county through its designated official may require. A nonrefundable fee for the application shall be set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  Inspections of the location of work in the area where the permit is requested may be made by the county engineer or transportation director prior to the issuance of a permit, during the progress of the work, and after the work is completed. 
(c)  At the time of application, the county engineer may accept a surety bond, bank letter of credit, or other form of security acceptable to the county for each permit issued, which security guarantees the permittee's performance and maintenance of repairs to any excavations or alterations in the road right-of-way. The security shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the repairs, and shall guarantee the performance of the repairs and the maintenance of same for a period of one year after the completion of the repairs. 
(d)  At the time of application, the applicant shall execute a document agreeing to indemnify the county for any costs, damages or liability resulting from work performed by the applicant, owner or their agent during the period in which the security described above in subsection (c), is in effect. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93, § VII; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-33. - Time for making application before work. 
(a)  Except in case of emergency, an application for a permit to excavate, obstruct or alter a public street, shall be made no less than ten days prior to the date the work is to commence. The permit shall be granted or denied by considering the following factors: 
(1)  The effect on the integrity of existing roadway facilities; 
(2)  The effect on traffic patterns, traffic congestion and traffic safety; 
(3)  The effect on ingress and egress to and from the surrounding properties; and 
(4)  The impact and development of the surrounding area. 
(b)  In the event a road is to have a lane of traffic blocked or is to be closed to traffic for excavation, a ten working day notice is required before work is to begin. The Bulloch County Transportation Department will determine if a press release is necessary, with the cost of such release, if any, to be borne by the applicant. The Bulloch Transportation Department shall receive from the permit holder a 24-hour notice before work is to start. When emergency work is necessary, the Bulloch County Transportation Department is to be notified immediately, including after normal working hours, weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-34. - Violations; punishment. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-7-93; Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Editor's note— Permit for street excavation, attached to Ord. of December 7, 1993, has not been set out herein, but is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 11.5-35. - Ordering removal of equipment, etc. 
Any person violating any provision of this article may be ordered by the county to remove any equipment, facilities and appliances from and discontinue the use of the public roads. 
(Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-36. - Injunction; restraining order. 
Without limitation as to other remedies, the county is hereby authorized to seek equitable relief in a court of proper jurisdiction to enforce the performance of any duty or act imposed by this article or for an order to restrain the breach of any duty or the commission of any act, imposed or prohibited or unauthorized by the provisions of this article. 
(Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Sec. 11.5-37. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of all members of the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department or the code enforcement division, at the direction of the county engineer or transportation director, to enforce any provision of this article which states that any act or omission is unlawful. 
(Amd. of 5-6-08) 
Secs. 11.5-38—11.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAFFIC 

Sec. 11.5-51. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Bulloch County Commercial Truck Traffic Ordinance." 
(Amend. of 4-16-02) 
Sec. 11.5-52. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used in this article shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Commercial truck means any truck with more than six wheels. 
County means the unincorporated area of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Designated road means any road listed in section 11.5-53(a) of this article. 
Local delivery means, with respect to a designated road, a delivery made by a commercial truck to a business or residence located on and with access to a designated road. Provided, however, that a delivery shall not under any circumstances be deemed a "local delivery" if an undesignated road also provides a means of access to the business or residence to whom the delivery is being made. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or private organization of any character. 
Undesignated road means any road not listed in section 11.5-53(a) of this article. 
(Amend. of 4-16-02) 
Sec. 11.5-53. - Commercial truck traffic prohibited. 
(a)  Commercial trucks shall be prohibited from traveling upon or utilizing the following roads within the county: 
(1)  Cypress Lake Road, portions of which are designated as County Road No. 145, County Road No. 147, County Road No. 153, and County Road No. 155 on the state department of transportation's County Road Map for Bulloch County. 
(2)  High Point Road and Brannen Road, which are designated as County Road No. 145 on the state department of transportation's County Road Map for Bulloch County. 
(3)  Country Club Road, which is designated as County Road No. 146 on the state department of transportation's County Road Map for Bulloch County. 
(4)  That portion of former State Route 46 that runs between State Route 67 and Ash Branch Church Road, which portion of former State Route 46 is designated as County Road No. 927 on the state department of transportation's County Road Map for Bulloch County. 
(5)  That portion of Mud Road that runs between State Route 80 and State Route 119 Connector, which portion of Mud Road is designated as County Road No. 572. 
(6)  That portion of Akins Pond Road that runs between Middleground Road and U.S. Highway 80/25, which portion of Akins Pond Road is designated as County Road No. 9 on the state department of transportation's County Road Map for Bulloch County. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) above shall not apply to commercial trucks when making a local delivery on any of the designated roads. 
(Amd. of 4-16-02; Amd. of 7-18-06; Amd. of 8-28-12; Amd. of 1-8-19(1)) 
Sec. 11.5-54. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Amd. of 4-16-02) 
Chapter 12 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Excise taxes on wine and malt beverages, § 3-5. 
State Law reference— County's authority to levy, assess and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel; or the right to use or possession of the furnishings; or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
Tax commissioner means the tax commissioner of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 2, 12-11-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-27. - Jurisdiction. 
The regulations in this article shall govern the excise tax collected on all rooms, lodgings and accommodations within the area of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 1, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 12-28. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) there is hereby levied an excise tax in the amount of five percent for the occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the county. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after January 1, 1991, although such occupancy may be pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 3, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-29. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business and renting guest rooms in the county, not exempted under section 12-30, shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 4, 12-11-90; Ord. of 7-5-94) 
Sec. 12-30. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a hotel operator subject to an excise tax on lodging under the jurisdiction of the City of Statesboro. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 5, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 12-31. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this county shall immediately register with the clerk on a form provided by the clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 12-28. The privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax, however, shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. The registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business, or intends to transact business; the location of his place or places of business; and other such information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 6, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-32. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes . All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the clerk monthly, on or before the 20th day of every month, next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 12-26. 
(b)  Filing of return. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (1951 Ga. Laws, page 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 7, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-33. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return(s) of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county under this article by any person, she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The clerk or her designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 8, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-34. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 12-32(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 9, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-35. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority. The clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 10, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-36. - Disposition of proceeds. 
The net proceeds from the collection of the tax imposed by this article, after deductions by the county for the actual costs of administration of the article, shall be used for promoting, attracting, stimulating and developing conventions and tourism in the county and promotion of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 11, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 12-37. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 13, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Sec. 12-38. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the clerk or her designee may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the clerk showing that she has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold a portion of the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit; interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be offset by the clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the clerk, he will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating that specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the clerk, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 1990-33, § 14, 12-11-90; Amend. of 2-21-07) 
Secs. 12-39—12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 12-61. - License tax imposed. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 10-18-83, § 1) 
Sec. 12-62. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 10-18-83, § 2) 
Sec. 12-63. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax imposed by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Res. of 10-18-83, § 3) 
Sec. 12-64. - Due date. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 12-28 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 10-18-83, § 4) 
Secs. 12-65—12-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL COUNTY TAX DISTRICT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-76. - Constitutional authority for establishing special tax districts within the county. 
The board of commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia is authorized by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts and to levy and collect fees, assessments and taxes within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Secs. 12-77—12-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETLIGHT TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 12-101. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide the citizens of the county with a procedure for the installation, maintenance and operation of streetlights in certain public rights-of-way in the unincorporated areas of this county. To that end, this article is adopted in order to effect the creation of streetlight tax districts to pay for services rendered by such streetlights. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-102. - Definitions. 
(a)  Property owner. The term "property owner" or "owner", as used in this article, shall include all persons holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of the county within a proposed streetlight tax district at the time the petition for the creation of said district is submitted as provided herein. For the purpose of petitioning the board of commissioners for the creation of a new streetlight tax district, the property owner/owners shall have one vote per platted lot within a particular proposed streetlight tax district. The term "property owner" or "owner" specifically excludes tenants in possession of property within the streetlight tax district. 
(b)  Streetlight tax district. A "streetlight tax district" is a specific type of special tax district within the county. This type of special tax district is authorized pursuant to Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. Streetlight tax districts may be created in order to collect the electricity charges incurred for streetlights in said district. 
(c)  Existing subdivision. Any subdivision which has been approved by the county planning commission on the effective date of this article. 
(d)  New subdivision. Any subdivision which is approved by the planning commission after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-103. - Streetlight tax districts created; register; responsibility for costs. 
(a)  New special tax districts which shall be known as streetlight tax districts may be created upon submission of proper petition and resolution of the board of commissioners as provided hereinafter. Each new streetlight tax district so created shall be assigned a number and shall be designated by recorded plats showing each lot therein. 
(b)  A register of streetlight tax districts shall be maintained in the office of the county manager or his designee and the office of the county tax commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of the streetlights and poles, the cost of installing the streetlights, and any costs for the subsequent maintenance of said streetlights shall be the responsibility of the developer, the property owners, the utility company contracting to provide electrical services for the streetlights in that district, or such other entities having an interest in such service. The county shall not be responsible for any such costs. 
(d)  The cost of electricity for streetlight services as provided by this article shall be the responsibility of the owners of the property within the special tax district. The prorata cost of the electricity shall be assigned to each platted lot within the special tax district. 
(e)  Administrative costs incurred by the county in the collection of the streetlight tax shall be the responsibility of the property owners in the district for which said costs were incurred. This administrative charge assessed each year shall be set by the board of commissioners, but shall not exceed 15 percent of the total charges of the utility company for that district for the preceding year; provided, however, the maximum administrative charge provided herein (15%) may be decreased or increased from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. Provided further, that the board of commissioners shall be authorized to establish different administrative charges for different special tax districts and to adjust the respective rates from time to time by resolution, after taking into consideration all of the cost factors involved in collecting the charges contemplated by this article, including, but not limited to, the delinquency rate within a particular special tax district. The prorata portion of administrative charges for the tax district for each lot shall be charged to the owners of the property. Notwithstanding anything herein, the minimum annual administrative fee for any special purpose streetlighting tax district shall be $ 50.00. 
(f)  The total charge to property owners for streetlight services shall be on a per lot basis as is determined by resolution of the board of commissioners, giving consideration for the electrical service charges from the utility company for streetlight services provided within the district, the administrative costs incurred by the county in the collection of the streetlight tax, and the number of lots irrespective of size or improvements on such lots. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-104. - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The charges for street lighting in each streetlight district shall be paid as a streetlight district tax, and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot owner within each streetlight tax district. The date for determining ownership of each lot shall be January 1st of each year. 
(b)  The administration payment and accounting of the services herein authorized shall be the responsibility of the board of commissioners or some department of the county government to which that responsibility shall be assigned by the board of commissioners. Any proration of such charges between owners of lots to which title is transferred during any year shall be the responsibility of the sellers and buyers of said lots. 
(c)  The office of the tax commissioner of the county shall be responsible for the timely collection of the taxes, fees and assessments assessed to each streetlight tax district and shall remit said sums to the board of commissioners in the same manner as other taxes are remitted. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-105. - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the county shall have all rights available under the laws of the state for assessment, the creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure and sale. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-106. - Deposit required; forfeiture. 
In addition to other charges authorized in this article, the county shall have the right to require deposits from the lot owners receiving the streetlight service in any or all such streetlight tax districts created hereunder in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of such service for the respective lot until the due date for the tax bill containing the lot owners share of expenses for the lighting service. This deposit shall be held by the county as security for payment for services rendered pursuant to this article, and the county shall have the authority to setoff against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the county. Notice of such setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property serviced by the streetlights, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the county. Any required deposit as contemplated herein shall be retained by the county, so long as the streetlight tax district is in existence. Upon termination of the existence of such district, any refund of such deposits will be made to the record owner of said lot on the date of termination. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-107. - Lighting in existing residential areas and subdivisions; creation of streetlight districts; constructive knowledge of this article and the streetlight districts created pursuant to said article. 
(a)  Any property owner in any unincorporated area of the county may present a request for the creation of a streetlight district to the county manager or his designee. The request shall designate boundaries for a streetlighting district which shall serve the lot owner presenting the request and other property owners within said geographical area. The request shall include a plat or plats showing the proposed streetlighting district. The office of the county manager shall then provide a petition for the creation of the proposed streetlighting district to be circulated by the presenter of the request among the lot owners in the proposed district. If the proposed streetlighting district extends beyond the bounds of an existing subdivision or a new subdivision and includes lots or parcels outside the existing or new subdivision, then equally 75 percent of the owners of the lots within the existing or new subdivision and 75 percent of the owners outside the existing or new subdivision and within the proposed district must sign the petition in order to be presented to the board of commissioners. In all other instances, 75 percent of the owners of lots within the proposed streetlighting district must sign the petition for the creation of a streetlighting district for the petition to be presented to the board of commissioners for consideration. Unless 100 percent of the lot owners have signed the petition, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners after having been advertised one time in the official organ of the county; and a sign or signs [shall] be posted in the proposed streetlighting district giving notice of the hearing, at least 10 days before the public hearing. 
(b)  The petition for creation of the proposed streetlight district must be returned to the county manager within 90 days after it is obtained from such manager's office. The county manager or his designee shall verify the signatures on the petition and that the requisite number of property owners have signed said petition. 
(c)  By signing the petition for the creation of a new streetlight district, all petitioners within a proposed streetlight district shall be deemed to have actual or constructive notice of this article and all the provisions contained herein. In consideration of the streetlight services provided pursuant to this article, said petitioners shall agree to abide by and comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(d)  All successors-in-interest to the lot owners within a certain district at the time of the creation of said streetlight tax district shall be deemed to have constructive notice of this article and the existing streetlight district wherein the lot is located due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a petition as provided herein and after a public hearing if one is required, the board of commissioners shall take under consideration the establishment of the requested special tax district. The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may vote to create one or more of such districts, but nothing contained herein shall be construed as creating an obligation on the board of commissioners to create any one or more of such districts. Likewise, nothing contained herein shall create any absolute right by any property owner or owners to the creation of any such district. The discretion as to whether to create any such district shall be that solely of the board of commissioners, based upon all the evidence available at the time of determination. Further, the creation by the board of commissioners of one or more such districts shall not create an absolute right by petitioners for another district or districts to the creation of such other district, nor shall the creation of one or more districts generate a precedent or obligation of the board of commissioners regarding the creation of additional special tax districts. The petition for each such special tax district shall be considered by the board of commissioners based upon the totality of the evidence regarding each respective proposed special tax district. The decision of the board of commissioners, in the exercise of its discretion, shall be final. 
(f)  The decision of the board of commissioners to create special streetlighting district shall be evidenced by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting of the board of commissioners. The form of said resolution shall be substantially in the form attached hereto as appendix "A". 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1; Ord. No. 1995-38, 12-5-95) 
Editor's note— Appendix "A", attached to Ord. of August 3, 1993, has not been set out herein, but is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 12-108. - Streetlight construction by property developers for new subdivisions; constructive knowledge of streetlight districts created under this article. 
(a)  All developers of residential subdivisions, at the time of the submission of the preliminary plats or drawings of the development to the planning commission, may present a proposed streetlight service for the development and the establishment of a special streetlight tax district for the subdivision. The proposal presented by the developer must be approved by the planning commission prior to installation of streetlights in the development. All fixtures and poles to be used shall be approved not only by the planning commission but also by the utility company which will provide electricity to the streetlights and which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. Upon approval by the planning commission and receipt of written approval from the utility company, the board of commissioners may, upon petition, consider the creation of a special streetlight tax district for said subdivision. All rights and obligations shall be the same as set forth in section 12-107(e) above. 
(b)  The developer shall be billed by the county or utility provider for those charges contemplated in section 12-103(f) above for the calendar year of creation of the special tax district and the calendar year thereafter. For subsequent years owners shall be billed their prorata share of said costs in the same manner as existing subdivisions which are designated as special tax districts. In addition, all purchases of lots located in a new subdivision which has been designated as a special tax district as provided herein shall be deemed to have constructive notice of said district and the obligation imposed thereby due to the public records containing such information. 
(c)  All successors in-interest to a developer in a subdivision wherein a streetlight district has been approved under this section, shall have constructive notice of said district due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-109. - Pre-payment for services. 
(a)  Upon submission of the petition as contemplated by section 12-32 above, or request for consideration after planning commission approval as contemplated by section 12-33 above, there shall be delivered to the board of commissioners by the party or parties seeking tax district creation under this chapter, sufficient certified funds to pay for the estimated total costs, including administration fees, of providing the services for the special streetlighting tax district from the time of inception of said tax district until the end of the calendar year in which the tax district is created, said sum to be deposited by the county and drawn upon to pay the expenses of streetlight services until the ad valorem tax bills for the year in which the tax district is created are due, which said tax bills shall include the charges to the respective property owners for the next calendar year as hereinafter provided. The total estimated cost, including administrative costs, for the calendar year following the year of creation, shall be billed on the ad valorem tax notices due on December 20th of the year of creation and likewise for each year thereafter. 
(b)  The requirements of this section are supplemental to and not a substitute for any requirements imposed pursuant to section 12-31 above. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-110. - Authority to contract with public utilities. 
The board of commissioners may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. Annually, prior to the first day of September, the county manager, or his designee, shall secure a guaranteed rate from the applicable public utilities for the forthcoming year of service in such streetlight tax districts, as tax assessment for the service is calculated and billed in advance. Should the public utilities fail or refuse to guarantee the rate for the forthcoming year, the board of commissioners may, at its option, resolve to (i) terminate or eliminate the applicable streetlight tax districts according to section 12-111, or (ii) continue the applicable streetlight tax districts for the forthcoming year at the rate for the then-current year. If the board of commissioners chooses the latter option, the county shall have no responsibility or liability for utility charges during the forthcoming year that are in excess of the rate for the then-current year." 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1; Ord. No. 1996-10, 4-2-96; Amd. of 1-5-10) 
Sec. 12-111. - Termination/elimination of streetlight tax district by county; by lot owners within district. 
(a)  Termination by county. The board of commissioners may terminate or abolish any and all streetlight tax districts within the county by resolution. Any such termination or abolition shall be effective January 1st of the year following the adoption of said resolution. Upon said termination, the county shall not be responsible for the collection of fees, assessments, and taxes for electrical services rendered for streetlights after the date of termination and shall not be responsible for the charges of the utility company for electricity for said streetlights after termination. 
(b)  Termination by lot owners within the district. At any time, the property owners within a streetlight district may request the board of commissioners to terminate said district by submission of a petition containing the signatures of the owners of 75 percent of the lots within the district. Based upon all available information, the board of commissioners shall be authorized but not required to grant the property owners' request to terminate the streetlight tax district. Any such termination shall be effective January 1st of the year following the adoption by the board of commissioners of the termination resolution. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Sec. 12-112. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 8-3-93, § 1) 
Secs. 12-113—12-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ROAD TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 12-201. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide citizens of the county with a procedure for the paving and/or improvement and public dedication of private roads in the unincorporated areas of the county. To that end, this division is adopted in order to effect the creation of road tax districts to pay for such paving and/or improvement. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-202. - Definitions. 
Property owner. The term "property owner" as used in this division shall include all persons, and their successors and assigns, holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of the county within a proposed road tax district at the time the petition for the creation of said district is submitted as provided herein. For the purpose of petitioning of the board of commissioners for the creation of a new road tax district, the property owners shall have one vote per platted lot within a particular proposed road tax district. The term "property owner" specifically excludes tenants in possession of property within the road tax district. 
Road tax district. The term "road tax district" is a specific type of special tax district within the county. Special tax districts are authorized pursuant to article 9, section 2, paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. Road tax districts may be created for property owners to amortize the cost of paving and/or improving a road or roads within the district. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-203. - Road tax districts created; register; responsibility for costs. 
(a)  New special tax districts which shall be known as road tax districts may be created upon the submission of a proper petition and a resolution of the board of commissioners. Each new road tax district so created shall be assigned a number and be designated by recorded plats showing each lot therein. 
(b)  A register of road tax districts shall be maintained in the office of the county manager or his designee and the office of the county tax commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(c)  The cost of paving and/or improving the road or roads shall be advanced by the county. The county shall have the authority to contract with the necessary parties to complete the job. The cost of paving and/or improving the road or roads (including, but not limited to, any necessary legal, engineering, or survey work) shall then be paid by the property owners of the road tax district and amortized over a period of time that includes no more than five successive annual ad valorem real property tax bills, and shall bear interest at a rate of prime plus one percent per annum. The pro-rata amortized cost of the paving and/or improvement shall be assigned to each platted lot within the road tax district. The road tax district shall end upon payment of the amortized cost to the county. 
(d)  An administrative fee of $25.00 per lot shall be charged by the county to cover administrative costs of a road tax district; provided, however, that the total administrative fee shall be not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for any road tax district. The administrative fee shall be included and amortized with the costs of paving and/or improving the road or roads. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-204. - Collection and responsibility for administration. 
(a)  The amortized cost for road paving and/or improvement in each road tax district shall be paid as a road district tax and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot owner within each road tax district. The date for determining ownership of each lot shall be January 1 of each year. Any proration of such charges between owners of lots to which title is transferred during any year shall be the responsibility of the buyers and sellers of such lots. 
(b)  The office of the tax commissioner of the county shall be responsible for the timely collection of taxes, fees, and assessments assessed to each road tax district and shall remit such sums to the board of commissioners in the same manner as other taxes are remitted. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-205. - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the county shall have all rights available under the laws of the state for the assessment and creation of a tax lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure, and sale. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-206. - Deposit and forfeiture. 
In addition to the charges authorized in this division, the county may require deposits from the property owners within the road tax district in any or all such road tax districts created hereunder in an amount not to exceed one year's prorated cost for the pavement and/or improvement of the road or roads. This deposit shall be held by the county as security for payment for services rendered pursuant to this ordinance, and the county shall have the authority to setoff against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the county. Notice of setoff shall be given to the property owner by mail at the address of the property, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this ordinance, the property owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the county. Any required deposit as contemplated herein shall be retained by the county so long as the road tax district is in existence. Any deposit remaining in the last year of the road tax district shall be applied by the county to the remaining indebtedness with any excess refunded to the then-current property owner. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-207. - Creation of road tax districts; constructive knowledge of this division and the road tax districts created pursuant to this division. 
(a)  Any property owner in the unincorporated area of the county whose lot has access on a private road may present a request for the creation of a road tax district to the county manager or his or her designee. The request shall designate the boundaries for a road tax district which shall serve the property owner presenting the request and other property owners within the geographical area. The request shall include a plat or plats showing the proposed road tax district. The office of the county manager shall then provide a petition to be circulated by the presenter of the request among the property owners in the proposed district. At least 75 percent of the property owners within the proposed district must sign the petition for the petition to be presented to the board of commissioners. If the proposed road tax district encompasses more than one subdivision as shown by plats filed in the public land records of the county, 75 percent of the property owners within the proposed road tax district in each and all of the included subdivisions must sign the petition. Unless 100 percent of the property owners have signed the petition, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners after having advertised one time in the official legal organ of the county, and a sign or signs shall be posted in the proposed road tax district giving notice of the hearing, at least ten days before the public hearing. 
(b)  By signing the petition for the creation of a new road tax district, all petitioners within a proposed road tax district shall be deemed to have actual or constructive notice of this division and all the provisions contained herein as well as the request and petition for a road tax district. 
(c)  All successors in interest to the property owners within a certain district at the time of the creation of said road tax district shall be deemed to have constructive notice of this division and the existing road tax district or request wherein the lot is located due to the existence of public records containing such information. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a petition as provided herein and after a public hearing, if one is required, the board of commissioners shall take under consideration the establishment of the requested road tax district. The board of commissioners, in its sole discretion, may vote to create one or more of such districts based upon all of the evidence presented to the board of commissioners. Nothing contained herein shall create any right by any property owner or owners to the creation of such districts. The creation of one or more such districts shall not generate a precedent or obligation on the board of commissioners to approve future requests for a road tax district; rather, each proposed district shall be considered based on the totality of the evidence regarding each respective district. The decision of the board of commissioners, in the exercise of its discretion, shall be final. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners to create a special road tax district shall be evidenced by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-208. - Division applicable to private roads only; conveyance of right-of-way to county; termination of road tax district for failure to convey right-of-way. 
(a)  This division shall only be applicable to private roads in the unincorporated area of the county. Road tax districts may be created as provided herein for the paving and/or improvement of such private roads, provided that such private roads are conveyed to the county for public use as provided herein. Provided, however, that road tax districts shall only be created to pave unpaved private roads or to improve paved private roads to county standards for acceptance by the county. Road tax districts shall not be created for improvements to unpaved private roads that do not include the paving of said roads. 
(b)  After the adoption of a resolution creating a road tax district, but prior to the commencement of any paving and/or improvement to the road or roads within said district, the owner of the road or roads shall convey good and sufficient fee simple title to the right-of-way of said road or roads to the county. If any additional right-of-way is needed for the paving and/or improvement of the road or roads within said district, the property owners in said district shall convey good and sufficient fee simple title to said additional right-of-way to the county. Said right-of-way conveyances shall be at no cost to the county. 
(c)  If the owner of the road or roads within a road tax district and/or the property owners within said district fail to convey necessary right-of-way to the county within a reasonable time after the adoption of the resolution creating the district, the county manager or his or her designee may recommend to the board of commissioners that a subsequent resolution be adopted to terminate said district. The determination of what constitutes a "reasonable time" shall be solely within the discretion of the county manager or his or her designee based on all the circumstances. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Sec. 12-209. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this division is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject of this division, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this division shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Amd. of 10-19-10) 
Secs. 12-210—12-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment of April 20, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 12-130—12-140. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 12-230—12-240. 

Sec. 12-230. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following meanings: 
Administrative fee means the component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. The administrative fee shall be set by the county commission in the schedule of fees and charges. 
Commission means the Board of Commissioners of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
County means Bulloch County, Georgia or any of its officials, departments, employees, or agents, as the context may require or permit. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099; provided, however, that an individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary remuneration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members as such. Such organizations encompass those which are truly altruistic as well as those whose aid is limited to its membership. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by the county for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the county acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the county as an exercise of its police power and as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-231. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount as set forth in the county's schedule of fees and charges shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration and annual renewal of such accounts. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-232. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  Commencing on July 1, 2010, and for each succeeding year thereafter, an annual occupation tax as set forth in the county's schedule of fees and charges for each location or office is levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county; provided, however, that a business or practitioner shall not be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each office or location. 
(b)  Commencing on July 1, 2010, and for each succeeding year thereafter, an annual occupation tax as set forth in the county's schedule of fees and charges is levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business or practitioner: (i) has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (ii) owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the unincorporated part of the county. Provided, however, that a business or practitioner with no location or office in the State of Georgia shall be exempt from this occupation tax if: 
(1)  The business or practitioner provides to the county satisfactory proof that it has paid an occupation tax to another local government in the State of Georgia in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner; or 
(2)  The business or practitioner provides to the county satisfactory proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state. 
(c)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the unincorporated area. 
(d)  Practitioners of professions and occupations who are listed in O.C.G.A. 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax resulting from application of the other provisions of this article; or 
(2)  A fee in the amount of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at that practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the county relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(e)  An occupation tax certificate shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Transfer of one-half or less of the ownership interest in any business shall not be considered a transfer of ownership. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2); Amd. of 5-15-12) 
Sec. 12-233. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise. 
(2)  Blind persons. 
(3)  Veterans of peacetime service in the United States armed forces who have a physical disability incurred during the period of such service. 
(4)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(5)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(6)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(7)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. 2-10-105. 
(8)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. 33-8-8. 
(9)  Motor common or contract carriers governed by O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 7, art. 1. 
(10)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-5-355, one or more persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots when: (i) the bill of lading for the shipment is taken in the name of an individual; (ii) the freight is paid pro rata by the owners of the goods or merchandise; and (iii) the goods or merchandise is being procured for the individual use of the purchasers and not for sale by them. 
(11)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-5-356, the sale or introduction into the county of any agricultural product raised in the state including, but not limited to, swine, cattle, sheep, goats, poultry, and the products of such animals when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale of the product is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the county. 
(12)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. 48-6-93. 
(13)  If not otherwise exempt under this chapter, pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-13-55 any occupation tax for a charitable trust, or for a functionally related business of a charitable trust or any affiliated activity, shall not exceed $200.00 per year. 
(14)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state. 
(15)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. 2-2-8. 
(16)  Established churches, religious, charitable, civic and fraternal organizations chartered or operated as nonprofit organizations and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with person taxed by virtue of the provisions of this article. 
(17)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity or commercial transactions, where such activity or transactions involve personal assets and are not an occupation for the individual. 
a.  In regard to yard/garage sales, this exemption shall apply to persons or nonprofit organizations conducting such sales at a private residence or at a commercial location with an occupancy permit and with permission of the property owner, not exceeding four events per year. 
b.  In regard to the rental of personally owned residences, this exemption shall apply to persons renting a maximum of five residences within the county. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-234. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any county occupation tax certificate may be issued. Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-235. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business or practitioner required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business or practitioner required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the occupation tax certificate is issued. 
(c)  The county shall not impose registration or other regulatory requirements on attorneys authorized to practice law by the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-236. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before July 1 of each year, each business or practitioner subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article shall file an occupation tax return with the county, on a form approved by and available from the county. 
(b)  Businesses and practitioners subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article shall submit to the county or make available to the county within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the county to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or to facilitate levying or collecting the occupation tax. 
(c)  Authorized employees, agents or officers of the county may inspect the books of any business or practitioner subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the county. Adequate records shall be kept and made available for examination by designated county agents and if, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-237. - Confidentiality. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-13-15, information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to the county for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure under O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 4; provided, however, that such information may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-238. - Date due; penalty and interest. 
(a)  Any occupation tax authorized pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually within 30 days following July 1. In the event that any business or practitioner commences business on any date after July 1, the occupation tax shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
(b)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the county on or after January 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year until July 1 shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for an entire year; provided, however, that a practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his or her occupation tax the amount described in section 12-232(e)(2) of this article shall receive no reduction in such amount; and provided further that the amount of any annual administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(c)  Payment of an occupation tax shall not be required prior to the commencement of business, nor shall it in any other manner act as a precondition on the practice of law. 
(d)  Any occupation tax or administrative fee imposed by this article which remains due and unpaid for 90 days after the due date of the tax or fee shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due, and shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-239. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the county's development services division to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, and to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  In addition to other available remedies for the collection of occupation taxes and administrative fees from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the development services division shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayer for any or all of the following: (i) the amount of the occupation taxes or administrative fees when the taxes or fees become due; (ii) any penalty imposed by section 12-238 of this article; and (iii) any interest imposed by section 12-238 of this article. 
(c)  Any business, practitioner or person who is subject to occupation taxes and administrative fees and who fails or refuses to pay the taxes or fees, or who violates any other provision of this article, shall be subject to issuance of a citation and prosecution for such violations in the Magistrate Court of Bulloch County. Upon conviction thereof, the magistrate court may impose a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 
(d)  Except for a person whose qualifications to practice his or her profession are determined by the general laws of the state, if any business or practitioner fails to pay occupation taxes or administrative fees or any part thereof when due, or fails to permit inspection of books and records as required by this article, such failure shall ipso facto revoke any occupation tax certificate issued to such business or practitioner by the county. No new occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the county to such business or practitioner until and unless any and all delinquent occupations taxes and administrative fees have been paid, or inspection of books and records as required by this article has been permitted. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2)) 
Sec. 12-240. - Public hearings. 
After July 1, 2010, the county shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(Amd. of 4-20-10(2); Amd. of 5-15-12) 
Chapter 13 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; offenses, Ch. 10; signs, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the O.C.G.A. title 40, chapter 6, O.C.G.A., §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2 through 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(c)  Pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning the power of local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, this section is adopted for the purpose of regulating speed limits within the county. The designated speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation conducted by the State Department of Transportation as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. of 4-6-93) 
Editor's note— Table for on-system and off-system roads, attached to Ord. of April 6, 1993, has not been set out herein, but is available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations adopted by the board of commissioners on January 21, 1992, and as amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 1997-39, adopted Nov. 4, 1997. Amendments to the original regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original regulations. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. Prior to its amendment in its entirety by Ord. No. 1997-39, App. B, §§ 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 5.1—5.3, 6.1—6.7, 7.0—7.5, 8.1, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 10.5, 11.1—11.8, 12.1—12.5, 13.1—13.7, and 14.1—14.7, derived from §§ 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1—4.5, 5.1—5.3, 6.1—6.7, 7.0—7.6, 8.1, 8.2, 9.1, 10.0—10.5, 11.1—11.8, 12.1—12.6, 13.1—13.7, and 14.1—14.7 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 3, 1992. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; cable television, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; manufactured homes, Ch. 9; signs, Ch. 11; zoning, App. C. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

1.1. - Authority. 
The general planning authority contained in Article IX, Section 2, paragraph 4 of the 1983 Constitution, grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development. 
State Law reference— Such act is not included in the Official Code of Georgia, but planning and zoning authority is contained in the Const., art. IX § 2, para. 4. 
1.2. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall apply to all unincorporated land located within the boundaries of the County of Bulloch. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE 

2.1. - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within Bulloch County, Georgia. In furtherance of the general intent of this Appendix, the regulation of land subdivision by municipal and county governing authorities is authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)  To encourage the development of economically sound and stable municipalities and counties; 
(b)  To assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(c)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land developments; 
(d)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
(e)  To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan (if applicable) of the municipalities and the county. 
2.2. - Short title. 
This appendix shall be known as and may be cited as the "Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations." 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

3.1. - Rules. 
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and the words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural, the singular. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(c)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(d)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
3.2. - Definitions. 
3.2.1.  Accessory building. A secondary building or structure subordinated to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel, but pertaining to the use of the main building. 
3.2.2.  Alley. A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, is not used for general traffic, and is not otherwise officially designated as a street. A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
3.2.3. Reserved. 
3.2.4.  Buildable area. That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear yard setbacks required for the district have been subtracted from the total area. 
3.2.5.  Building. Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
3.2.6.  Building line. A line extended along the foundation of a building from which is measured the distance that a building must be set back to meet the minimum distance from the building line to the front, rear or side property line or in some cases, to the centerline of an adjacent roadway. 
3.2.7.  Building site. The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
3.2.8.  Building and zoning official. One or more persons, officers or officials or his authorized representative, whom the county manager has appointed to administer and enforce, individually or collectively, the building code, subdivision, and zoning ordinances. 
3.2.9.  Certified document. A survey, sketch, plat, map or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineers, registered surveyor, architect or other legally recognized person. 
3.2.10.  Density. The number of units or buildings per acre, or the number of people per unit, building, acre or mile, or the quantity of people, structures or units within a specified area. 
3.2.11.  Easement. The right or privilege of using another's property, for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, ingress and egress. 
3.2.12.  Engineer. Any person being licensed by the state of Georgia as an engineer capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewage systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. 
3.2.13.  Family. Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or in foster care. Refer to zoning ordinance for standards. 
3.2.14.  Flood prone areas. The land that is usually flooded whenever a rise in the water level of a creek, stream, river or other body of water is experienced. That land adjacent to a creek, stream, river channel, canal or other body of water that is designated as a floodplain or flood prone area by a governmental agency. 
3.2.15. Reserved. 
3.2.16.  Governing authority. The board of commissioners of the county. 
3.2.17.  Lot. Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official county zoning maps (if applicable) or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
3.2.18.  Lot area. Shall mean the total area of the lot including easements. 
3.2.19.  Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
3.2.20.  Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
3.2.21.  Lot, interior. Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley. 
3.2.22.  Lot line, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this article; provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval of the building official. 
3.2.23.  Lot line, rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the building official. 
3.2.24.  Lot lines, side. A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
3.2.25.  Lot, reverse frontage. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted to one street. 
3.2.26.  Metes and bounds description. A method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distances from an easily identifiable location or point. 
3.2.27.  Manufactured home. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, U.S.C. § 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the development standards for the zone in which located. 
3.2.28.  Planning and zoning commission. The county planning and zoning commission. 
3.2.29.  Plat. A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties prepared and stamped by a registered surveyor. 
3.2.30., 3.2.31. Reserved. 
3.2.32.  Principal building. The building on a lot in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
3.2.33.  Public use. Use of any land, water, buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, county, state or federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
3.2.34., 3.2.35. Reserved. 
3.2.36.  Reserve strip. A strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for the purpose of controlling access to the public way. 
3.2.37.  Right-of-way line. The boundary of a strip of land designed, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access. 
3.2.38.  Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two adjoining lots under the same ownership are used, the exterior property lines of the lots so grouped shall be used in determining setbacks. 
3.2.39.  Site. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed. 
3.2.40.  Street. A right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property. For the purposes of these regulations, the term shall also mean avenue, boulevard, road, lane and other public or private ways. 
3.2.41.  Street, arterial. A street of exceptional continuity that is intended to carry the greater portion of through-traffic from one area of the county to another. 
3.2.42.  Street, collector. Streets which are neither local streets nor arterial streets. Their location and design are such that they are of exceptional continuity, serve as routes passing through residential areas, and serve as means of moving traffic from local streets and feeding it into arterial streets. 
3.2.43.  Street, cul-de-sac. A short local street having but one end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a permanent turn-around. 
3.2.44.  Street, dead-end. A street not intersecting other streets at both ends, and distinguished from a cul-de-sac by not being terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
3.2.45.  Street, local. Streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and by nature of their layout serve only vehicles with either origin or destination within the area. 
3.2.46.  Street, marginal access. A minor service street which parallels and which is immediately adjacent to an arterial street (frontage road). 
3.2.47. Reserved. 
3.2.48.  Surveyor. A person who is licensed by the state of Georgia as a registered land surveyor. 
3.2.49.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
3.2.50.  Subdivider. Any person, firm or corporation who or which divides for sale, rent or lease or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. 
3.2.51  Subdivision. The division of a lot of record into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purposes of sale, devise or development, whether immediately or in the future, except that a subdivision does not include either of the following: 
(a)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are at least equal to the standards of the zoning ordinance; and 
(b)  The division of land where no new street is involved; provided, however, that a division of land that was previously approved as a subdivision with a new street or streets shall not come within this exception. 
Plats of such exceptions shall be required to be submitted as information by the planning and zoning commission which shall indicate such fact on the plats. 
(Amd. of 11-7-17) 
3.2.52.  Use. Any purpose for which a building or tract of land may be designed, arranged, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
3.2.53.  Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water including creek, canal, river or any other body of water, natural or artificial, including marshland, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear or side. 
3.2.54.  Yard. A required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted in this ordinance. A yard may also be known as a setback. 
3.2.55.  Yard, front. The open space on a lot located between the right-of-way boundary of the abutting street and the front building line as extended to the lot lines to either side. Any yard lying between an abutting street and the building line is considered a front yard. For example, in the case of a corner lot which is abutted on two sides by streets, both yards abutting the streets would be front yards; setbacks and other development standards for front yards would apply to both of these yards. 
3.2.56.  Yard, rear. The open space located between the rear property line and the rear building line as extended to the side lot lines. 
3.2.57.  Yard, side. The open space located between the side property line and the side building line as extended to the front and rear lot lines. 
3.2.58.  Zoning ordinance. An officially adopted ordinance (if applicable) that regulates the manner, type, size and use to which a piece of property may be put. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

4.1. - Four-step review. 
The procedure for review, consideration, and approval of a subdivision plat consists of four separate steps. These are: 
(a)  Review of sketch plans by the building and zoning official, county engineer, county planner and public safety director; 
(b)  Consideration and approval of sketch plan by planning and zoning commission; 
(c)  Review of preliminary plat (unless no new streets are involved and all lots are larger than three acres) by the building and zoning official, county engineer and public safety director; and 
(d)  Review of final plat by the building and zoning official and engineer. 
Approval at steps (a), (c) and (d) is contingent upon full compliance with requirements of this ordinance. Approval at step (b) is discretionary. Steps (a), (b) and (c) shall be completed prior to making any street improvement or installing any utilities. Step (d) shall be completed prior to the sale of any lots in the proposed subdivision. 
4.2. - Review procedure. 
The following procedure shall be followed in the submission, review, and action upon all subdivision plats: 
4.2.1.  Sketch plan review procedures. At least 25 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall submit to the building and zoning official and the planning and zoning commission or its representative ten copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. If phase development is contemplated, then a sketch plan for each phase will be required simultaneously. Included with the sketch plan must be a sketch map which shows the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area. The purpose of the sketch plan is to assist the subdivider prior to extensive site planning necessary for the preparation of the preliminary plat and to enable the subdivider to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. Utilizing the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, the building and zoning official and the planning and zoning commission shall review and approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the sketch plan within 45 days from the meeting at which it is considered. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the planning and zoning commission meeting. Failure of a subdivider to submit a preliminary plat within 18 months from the approval of the sketch plan will require resubmittal of the sketch plan to the planning and zoning commission for reconsideration. 
4.2.2.  Preliminary plat procedures. 
(a)  Application for preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall be submitted to the building and zoning office after approval of the sketch plan. The plat of the subdivision shall be submitted in four blue line prints and shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein. Any preliminary plat submitted to the building and zoning office shall contain the name, phone number, and address of the subdivider (or subdivider's designee); and no preliminary plat shall be approved by the building and zoning office without full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Actions by the building and zoning official may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the subdivider or designee to the address listed on the plat not less than five days before the hearing date fixed. Appeals from a decision of the planning and zoning commission shall be heard by the governing authority, with the same notice of hearing provided. All appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action being appealed was taken. 
(b)  Additional copies of the plat and supplemental information may be requested by the building and zoning official. The above-mentioned copies shall be distributed as required by section 5.2.4 of this ordinance and additionally as deemed necessary by the building and zoning official. The person or agency to which a copy of the preliminary plat is directed shall indicate any desired changes or comments on the plat and submit the plat to the building and zoning office prior to formal approval of the preliminary plat. 
(c)  The building and zoning official shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after formal submission, and, if approved, shall indicate in writing, stating the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express in writing his disapproval and the reasons therefor. Failure of the building and zoning official to act within 30 days after formal submission of the preliminary plat shall be deemed to constitute approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the building and zoning official on demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(d)  Preliminary approval of the subdivision plat shall be noted on the plat and certified by the building and zoning official. Also noted shall be the date on which the building and zoning official granted preliminary approval and the date of written notification to the subdivider or subdivider's authorized agent. Failure of a subdivider to initiate any development within 18 months from the approval of the preliminary plat will require resubmittal of a sketch plan to the planning and zoning commission for approval, unless an extension is requested by the subdivider and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Preliminary approval shall constitute approval of the proposed widths and alignments of streets and the dimensions and shapes of lots subject to the final approval of the county health department. Application for approval of the final record plat will be considered only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the building and zoning official, the subdivider may proceed to comply with the other requirements of these regulations and the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
4.2.3.  Final plat procedure. Application for final approval of the subdivision plat shall be submitted to the building and zoning official after approval of the preliminary plat (where applicable). Six copies of the final plat are required. The building and zoning official shall examine the final plat to determine if it meets all requirements of these regulations, conforms to the approved preliminary plat, and whether streets and easements qualify for dedication. If roads are to be built, subdivider will indicate such subdivider's proposal for a bond or bank letter of credit to the governing authority to assure their proper and timely construction. The building and zoning official shall grant approval or require the subdivider to make necessary modifications to conform to the standards required by the final plat. Actions of the building and zoning official and decisions of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed under the same procedure as outlined in section 4.2.2. If approved, a plat can be recorded in the clerk's office of the Bulloch County Superior Court upon authentication by the building and zoning official. For purposes hereof, authentication shall be in the following form, to wit: Approved for recording on the _____ day of _______, 20___, by the Bulloch County building and zoning official. 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
4.3. - Reserved. 
4.4. - Federal Housing Administration approval. 
In the event the subdivider plans to secure approval of the subdivision design by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured after submission to and approval of a preliminary plat by the building and zoning official. 
4.5. - Approval of subdivision in flood prone area. 
No portion of a subdivision which is subject to inundation by a flood of 100-year frequency or less shall be approved unless it conforms to the Bulloch County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws and regulations. All subdivisions must be designed to minimize flood damage; all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into the floodwaters; on-site waste disposal systems must be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
ARTICLE V. - PLAT REQUIREMENTS 

5.1. - Sketch plan. 
5.1.1.  Scale. The sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. 
5.1.2.  Vicinity map. The sketch plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. 
5.1.3.  Other requirements. The sketch plan shall show: 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision; 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer; 
(c)  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site; 
(d)  All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site and location of those property lines; 
(e)  North indicator; 
(f)  Date of preparation; 
(g)  Total acreage of the tract to be subdivided, lot layout, and estimated lot sizes; 
(h)  Zoning district classification of land to be subdivided and adjoining land; 
(i)  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision, including streets, roads, utility easements, and land reserved or dedicated for public or common use; 
(j)  In case of a resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon; 
(k)  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be subdivided; 
(l)  Location of existing buildings on the property to be subdivided; 
(m)  Location of city limit lines and county lines (if applicable); 
(n)  Sketch plan shall be on one sheet where practical. If the complete plan cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(o)  Map and parcel number. 
(p)  Wetlands as shown by the soils maps of Bulloch County. 
(q)  Location and setback from tower(s) on the property or on adjacent properties. 
5.1.4.  Subdivision of part of property. The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of such subdivider's entire tract even though such subdivider's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
5.1.5.  Recorded deed and plat. Along with the sketch plan, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the recorded deed vesting title in the owner(s) and a copy of any recorded plat showing the property. 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
5.2. - Preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations and shall include the following information in regards to the portion of the tract to be subdivided unless otherwise noted: 
5.2.1.  General conditions. 
(a)  Full name of subdivision. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer. 
(c)  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site. 
(d)  All names and addresses of all deed record owners of the land adjacent to the site. 
(e)  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
(f)  Vicinity map at a scale showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
(g)  Acreage to be subdivided. 
(h)  A written legal description (metes and bounds with all bearing and distances) of the acreage to be subdivided. 
(i)  Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is 1:7,500 or greater. 
(j)  Map and parcel number. 
5.2.2.  Existing conditions. 
(a)  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. A certificate from an authorized engineer or surveyor shall be required stating that the drainage from the property is adequate and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners. 
(b)  Zoning district classification (if applicable) of land to be subdivided and adjoining land. 
(c)  In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. 
(d)  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be subdivided. 
(e)  Location of existing adjoining property lines and existing buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
(f)  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines on the property to be subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
(g)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other under-ground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(h)  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. The drainage area may extend beyond the area to be subdivided. 
(i)  All elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
(j)  Location of city limit lines and county lines (if applicable). 
(k)  Location of any wetlands situated on the property to be subdivided. 
5.2.3.  Proposed conditions. 
(a)  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names, or designations, grades and cross sections. 
(b)  Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades with percent of grade slope. 
(c)  Detailed layout of all lots, including building setback lines; scaled dimensions on lots; utility easements with width and use. 
(d)  Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points of discharge and percolation tests, soil borings and wells as specified by the health department. 
(e)  Construction drawings of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet. Storm sewers shall be sized to accommodate runoff from a ten-year frequency rainfall. 
(f)  Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, curbing, planting, anti-erosion devices or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
(g)  Construction drawings, prepared and approved by an engineer licensed in the state of Georgia, of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. 
(h)  Designation of all land (if any) to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(i)  Designation of proposed use of all lots to be used for other than single-family residential (if any). 
(j)  Proposed major contour changes to areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
(k)  A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
(l)  Total number of lots, total acreage, total length and width of new streets. 
5.2.4.  Review and approval. The preliminary plat shall be approved by the building and zoning official only after review and approval of the following: 
(a)  The health department shall review the sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all preliminary plats after being provided with such percolation test or other information as it may require. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the building and zoning official in writing. 
(b)  The zoning official shall review the preliminary plat for conformity of its proposed streets with adopted design standards, if any, and existing and proposed public street improvements. 
(c)  A land disturbing activity permit, pursuant to the Bulloch County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, including all amendments in effect as of the date of application for such permit, shall be required prior to any land-disturbing activity on the project site. "Land-disturbing activity" includes, but is not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. An approved Sediment and Erosion Control Plan and review by the Soil Conservation Service and/or other agencies or officials designated by the building and zoning official is required as part of the application for the permit. 
(d)  Written approval from 911 on the proposed street name(s). 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
5.3. - Final plat. 
If the final plat is drawn in two or more sections, each section shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the several sections. The final plat shall contain the following specific information: 
(a)  Name of owner of record. 
(b)  Name of subdivision, date, north arrow and graphic scale. 
(c)  Name, registration number and seal of registered land surveyor. 
(d)  Names of counties in which subdivision is located and location map. 
(e)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing, length and width of every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of tangency and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
(f)  Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, watercourses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
(g)  Exact boundaries and original property lines within the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearings and distances. 
(h)  Streets and alleys, rights-of-way and street names. 
(i)  Rights-of-way of easements; location, widths and purposes. 
(j)  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, street trees and lot numbers. 
(k)  Parks, school sites or other public open spaces, if any. 
(l)  Location of any wetlands situated on the property to be subdivided. 
(m)  All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 of a foot and angles to the nearest second. 
(n)  Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers. 
(o)  A final plat shall be a good legible print, blue, white or other commercial print reproduced from a tracing made in India ink on a commercial grade of tracing cloth, tracing film, or tracing paper with a sheet size of not more than 24 by 36 inches, leaving a two-inch binding edge. 
(p)  Utility easements by widths and locations to include: 
(1)  Water; 
(2)  Gas; 
(3)  Sanitary sewer; 
(4)  Storm drainage; 
(5)  Electrical lines; 
(6)  Telephone lines. 
(q)  The following signed certificates shall appear on the final plat which is submitted to the building and zoning official by the subdivider: 
(1)  Certificate of approval for recording, building and zoning official. (To be placed on an original of the approved final plat by the building and zoning official and returned to the subdivider for recording). 
"The subdivision plat known as ___________ has been found to comply with the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations and was approved by the building and zoning official on the _____ day of _______, 20___, for recording in the office of Clerk of Court of Bulloch County, Georgia. 

 
(2)  Certificate of accuracy. 
"I hereby certify that this Plat is a true, correct and accurate survey as required by the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations; and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision, and that monuments shown have been located and placed to the specifications set forth in said regulations. 

 
(3)  Certificate of ownership and dedication, individuals. 
"It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to public or private use as noted. It is further certified that the streets, drainage system, sewer system and water system in ___________ Subdivision as shown on the plat dated ________ prepared by ___________ have (has) been installed in accordance with the Preliminary Plat (Construction Drawings) approved (Date) ________. It is understood this is not an assumption of maintenance by the governing authority. This dedication is for the public's right of ingress and egress only. 

 
(4)  Certificate of ownership and dedication, corporation. 
"It is hereby certified that ___________, a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, is the owner of the property shown and described thereon, and that all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and sites shown thereon, are dedicated to public or private use as noted. It is understood that this is not an assumption of maintenance by the governing authority. This dedication is for the public's rights of ingress and egress only. 
(Corporate seal required) 

 
5.3.1.  Final plat approval. The final plat shall be approved by the building and zoning official after review and approval by the following: 
(a)  County board of health (when required); 
(b)  County soil conservation district (when required); 
(c)  County manager or his designee; 
(d)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources (when required). 
5.3.2.  Permanent reference points. Prior to the approval of the final plat, all of the subdivision's permanent reference points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Subdivision corner tie. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station, U.S. Geological Survey, or Georgia Grid System coordinated monument, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure. In subdivisions of more than ten lots, the information for this corner tie shall include elevation above sea level making it in effect a benchmark which can be used to determine if individual lots are in a flood prone area. 
(b)  Monuments. 
(1)  Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the plat and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; at all points of curvature, points in the side lines of streets and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
(2)  It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along the side lines of the streets. 
(3)  All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
(4)  If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof shall be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
(5)  All monuments used shall be made of a minimum of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long. 
(6)  If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod at least one-half inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
(c)  Control corners. Within each block of a subdivision at least two monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. All control corners shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in diameter or square and not less than three feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means, a metal plate of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, the month and year it was installed and the words "control corner." 
(d)  Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than one-half inch in diameter and at least 24 inches in length shall set all corners, except those located by monuments. 
(e)  Accuracy. Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:7,500. 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

6.1. - Number of lots versus improvement standards. 
By permitting varying numbers of lots and varying levels of improvements, regulations enable the small developer to provide for growth in the rural, more slowly developing area of the county characterized by a lower lot absorption rate. Less restrictive development standards are imposed according to quantity of lots to allow for flexibility in subdivision sizes. 

 
(Ord. of 2-6-01; Amd. of 12-2-03) 
6.2. - Required improvements. 
A well-designed subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer until such buyer can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all necessary improvements provided. Likewise, a well-designed subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been installed. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get useable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall install and/or pay for the improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve the subdivision prior to the approval of the final plat. 
6.2.1.  Natural gas. Gas lines will not be allowed in a right-of-way. 
6.2.2.  Water supply. When a required water system is installed, water mains shall provide a minimum flow of water of 500 gallons per minute for four minutes or 250 gallons per minute for two hours at the furthermost point from the tank. Fire hydrants shall be provided at distances not greater than 1,000 feet apart. The water main may be located in the right-of-way but may not be located under the pavement. Water lines three-fourths-inch in size shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. When connection to a municipal or county water system is not available, the governing authority may make an exception to this rule. The water system shall be a permitted community water system as required by the State of Georgia Safe Water Drinking Act. An approved, signed copy from EPD (environmental protection division) of the water system plans must be submitted prior to final plat approval. Well sites should be of sufficient size to accommodate and adequately maintain the well and storage tank; provided, however, that the well shall be located no closer than 50 feet to any exterior property line of the subdivision. 
6.2.3.  Sanitary sewage. If a sanitary sewer is installed in a subdivision, sanitary sewers shall be installed to the plans and specifications approved by and in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the county health department. When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
6.2.4.  Sewage disposal systems. Prior to the construction of any community sewage disposal system, such as private septic tanks, an oxidation pond or other facility, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by and be in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the governing authority and the county health department. 
6.2.5.  Curb and gutters. If concrete curbs or paved valley type gutters are required, they shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an engineer, registered surveyor or architect, and approved by the county engineer or the local governing authority or its designee. 
6.2.6.  Street grading and surfacing. Street grading, base preparation, and surfacing shall be carried out by the subdivider according to plans and specifications approved by the county and the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
6.2.7.  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the subdivider according to plans and specifications approved by the county engineer. 
6.2.8.  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. The location and design shall be approved by the governing authority or its designee. 
6.2.9.  Topsoil. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
6.2.10.  Paving. In all subdivisions, regardless of size, if the minimum lot size is less than 20,000 square feet or the minimum lot width is less than 100 feet, paving will be required for all streets, including private streets, within the subdivision. 
6.2.11. Reserved. 
6.2.12.  Subdivision entrances. At the sketch plan stage, the planning and zoning commission may limit the number of entrances, driveways, or "curb cuts." At the preliminary and final plat stages, the building and zoning official shall coordinate with the county manager, county engineer, and public safety director with respect to entrances, driveways, or "curb cuts." Design standards on county or state roads shall be consistent with all state, federal, and local laws and applicable ordinances, including the Georgia Department of Transportation Rules and all amendments or revisions in effect as of the date of the preliminary plat approval. At the sketch plan stage, the planning and zoning commission may consider safety as well as require available alternatives for reducing the number of entrances, driveways or "curb cuts." 
(Ord. of 2-6-01; Amd. of 3-4-03; Amd. of 2-3-05) 
6.3. - Final plat revisions. 
If it should become necessary to revise a final plat due to a dimensional error, a revised plat shall be submitted to the county clerk of court for final recording after the building and zoning official has approved and signed the revised plat. 
6.4. - Performance bonds or bank letters of credit. 
In lieu of the installation and completion of required improvements prior to the final approval of a plat, the governing authority or its designee may accept a bond or bank letter of credit, in an amount and with a surety or bank and containing conditions and terms satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the county a period specified by the governing authority or its designee and expressed in the bond or bank letter of credit; and the county is hereby granted the power to enforce such bonds or bank letters of credit by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The form of performance bond or bank letter of credit is subject to approval by the governing authority or its designee. 
6.5. - Acceptance of streets by the county. 
The county shall not accept title to or assume responsibility for maintaining any street until at least one year after the street has been paved and until at least 50 percent of the lots have been built upon. 
6.6. - Private streets. 
A street which is not accepted as a public street shall have the status of "private street." Private streets may be approved for development only when they are eligible for categorization as a local street. Said street shall be designed so as to prohibit through traffic. To allow for installation of utilities, there will be a 60-foot easement indicated on the plat. Any private street shall be developed to present county standards. For subdivisions having five or fewer tracts or lots, a private street shall be exempted from the paving requirements except as provided in section 6.2.10. Prior to the issuance of building permits for lots within the development, the developer shall file with the county manager a release of maintenance agreement, releasing the county from any present or future maintenance of said streets. A sign indicating the existence of a private street will be erected at the intersection of each public street and private street. A disclosure statement shall be present on all plats of the subdivision and/or individual lots and included in all sales contracts. The statement shall set forth the ownership of the streets, the rights of purchasers and others to use the streets, provisions and responsibilities for maintenance and liability, and the rights of purchasers to enforce said provisions. Further, the statement shall advise purchasers that the county board of commissioners is not responsible for the maintenance of private streets. Each lot owner shall have title to the centerline of the private street adjacent to his lot subject to the 60-foot easement described herein. An alternative is the establishment of a responsible association with the authority to maintain the private streets. 
6.7. - Access. 
The planning and zoning commission shall not approve a subdivision in a location where the existing roads providing primary access are inadequate to serve the additional traffic generated by the development. If the ditches on existing county roads are to be used for drainage from the subdivision, the developer will re-grade said ditches and provide an all-weather drainage outlet. All re-grading and drainage outlets shall be approved by the governing authority or its authorized representatives. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

7.0. - Scope. 
The design standards shall conform to the minimum requirements of the property's zoning designation and as outlined in the zoning ordinance. 
7.1. - Streets. 
Streets shall conform to current county road construction and maintenance specifications. 
(a)  Subgrade shall be compacted to 100 percent of the laboratory maximum dry density. 
(b)  Sand-clay base must be Class B or better and meet section 814 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
(c)  Sand-clay base must be compacted to 100 percent of the laboratory maximum dry density and be no less than six inches in depth. 
(d)  Graded aggregate base should meet section 310 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications and be no less than four inches in depth. It shall be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum dry density. 
(e)  Soil aggregate meeting section 816 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications may be used upon approval of the county engineer. 
(f)  All base courses shall be primed in accordance with section 412 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
(g)  Asphalt mixtures must be an F-mix and satisfy section 828 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
(h)  A job mix formula for hot mix asphalt should be submitted to the county at least two weeks prior to paving. All mixtures must contain hydrated lime or anti-strip additive. Minimum thickness shall be one and one-half inches. 
(i)  Surface treatment construction shall be in accordance with section 424 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
(j)  Any pertinent laboratory testing, to verify the above items, shall be done for every 1,000 square yards of material placed. 
7.1.1.  Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all proposed streets shall (if applicable) be in conformity with official plans and maps and with existing amended plans of the planning and zoning commission. 
7.1.2.  Continuation of adjoining street system. The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended. 
7.1.3.  Access to adjacent properties. Where it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided. Houses fronting on minor streets shall have access from minor streets only. 
7.1.4.  Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by marking or in any deed or instrument, without first obtaining approval of the county manager or his designee. 
7.1.5.  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through-traffic will be discouraged. 
7.1.6.  Trees. It is recommended that as many trees as possible remain on the site during the initial clearing and grading and that trees normally remain unless they lie within a planned public right-of-way, within a planned building site or within the necessary paved areas surrounding or adjacent to the primary structure. 
7.1.7.  Railroads and highways (freeways, expressways). Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(a)  In residential districts a buffer strip not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to the railroad rights-of-way or limited access highways. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be so designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(b)  If applicable, in districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(c)  All other streets which are parallel to the railroad, when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
7.1.8.  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets by less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. 
7.1.9.  Right angle intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly a right angle as practicable. 
7.1.10.  Cul-de-sac. All dead end streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 60 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a 30-foot radius or as approved by the public safety director. 
7.1.11.  Alleys. Service alleys or drives may be required in multiple dwelling, commercial, and industrial developments and shall have a minimum width of 15 feet, but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission of the need for alleys. 
7.1.12.  Street right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(a)  Curb and gutter type construction. (Speed limit shall be posted 45 MPH or less.) 

 
(b)  Shoulder-type lane. 

 
(c)  Inverted crown type construction. 

 
(d)  Notes. 
(1)  When inverted crown is used, the minimum grade shall not be less than one-half of one percent. 
(2)  Except for local street, roadway widths shown do not provide for on-street parking; service lanes are intended only for loading and unloading of passengers and goods and for disabled vehicles and not for the storage of vehicles. 
(3)  Right-of-way (henceforth referred to as R/W) width listed is for only that portion of the typical section between the limits indicated in diagram. Sloping rights of additional R/W will be required for cut and fill slopes outside these limits; these future slope areas beyond indicated R/W limits should also be kept clear of development until slopes have been constructed. 
(4)  R/W widths greater than "minimum" are encouraged because they make for a safer, more aesthetic and more "comfortable" facility and permit future roadway widening without disrupting abutting property. 
7.1.13. Sight distance for vertical curves. Where vertical curves are used, the minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 

 
7.1.14.  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal access or minor street or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a collector, industrial or commercial service street or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares the centerline radius of curvature shall be determined by the state department of transportation or county engineer. On collector, industrial or commercial service streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 350 feet. On minor streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 150 feet unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical. 
7.1.15.  Street grades. Grades on major thoroughfares shall be established by the state department of transportation or county engineers. Grades on collector streets shall not exceed eight percent unless topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed 15 percent, unless topographic conditions make this impractical. All road side ditches shall have a minimum grade of not less than one-half of one percent. 
7.2. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided as required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. 
7.3. - Pedestrian ways. 
Crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, may be required by the planning and zoning commission where it is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
7.4. - Lots. 
Residential lots shall meet the minimum lot width and area requirements of the design standards of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
7.4.1.  Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be as nearly at right angles as possible to street lines. 
7.4.2.  Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street on which it has access. 
7.4.3.—7.4.6. Reserved. 
7.4.7.  Building setback lines. A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of this appendix shall be established on all lots. 
7.5. - General suitability. 
7.5.1.  Soils. The planning and zoning commission and the building and zoning official shall not approve a subdivision where the soil conditions have been determined not suitable for development by the Bulloch County Health Department pursuant to local, state, and federal laws, regulations and standards. 
7.5.2.  Flooding. Flood prone areas shall be consistent with the Bulloch County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

8.1. - Planned developments. 
In order to prevent creation of traffic hazards and insure the provision of offstreet parking and the provision of necessary utilities, plans for planned developments such as mobile home parks, apartment buildings and complexes, condominiums, planned unit developments and commercial developments consisting of three or more businesses shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for review and approval. 
8.1.1.  Conceptual site plan. The conceptual site plan submitted to the planning and zoning commission shall show the following information: 
(a)  The site plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. 
(b)  All names and addresses of developers. 
(c)  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site. 
(d)  All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site and location of those property lines. 
(e)  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
(f)  Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
(g)  Acreage to be developed. 
(h)  A written legal description (metes and bounds with all bearing and distances) of the acreage to be developed. 
(i)  Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be developed with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is 1:7,500 or greater. 
(j)  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. A certificate from an authorized engineer or surveyor shall be required stating that the drainage from the property is adequate and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners. 
(k)  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be developed. 
(l)  Location of existing adjoining property lines and existing buildings on the property to be developed. 
(m)  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines on the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
(n)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(o)  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed development. The drainage area may extend beyond the area to be developed. 
(p)  All elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
(q)  Location of city limit lines and county lines (if applicable). 
(r)  Location of any wetlands situated on the property to be developed. 
(s)  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names, or designations, grades and cross sections. 
(t)  Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades with percent of grade slope. 
(u)  Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points of discharge and percolation tests, soil borings and wells as specified by the health department. 
(v)  Construction drawings of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet. Storm sewers shall be sized to accommodate runoff from a ten-year frequency rainfall. 
(w)  Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, curbing, planting, anti-erosion devices or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
(x)  Construction drawings, prepared and approved by an engineer licensed in the state of Georgia, of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. 
(y)  Designation of all land (if any) to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(z)  Proposed major contour changes to areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
(aa)  A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
8.1.2.  Review and approval. The conceptual site plan shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission only after review and approval of the following: 
(a)  The health department shall review the sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all site plans after being provided with such percolation test or other information as it may require. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the building and zoning official in writing. 
(b)  The county manager or his designees shall review the plan for conformity of its proposed streets with adopted design standards, and existing and proposed public street improvements. 
(c)  A land disturbing activity permit, pursuant to the Bulloch County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, including all amendments in effect as of the date of application for such permit, shall be required for any land disturbing activity on the project site. "Land disturbing activity" includes, but is not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. An approved Sediment and Erosion Control Plan and review by the Soil Conservation Service and/or other agencies or officials designated by the building and zoning official is required as part of the application for the permit. 
8.1.3.  Enforcement of planned development requirements. No building permit shall be issued and no connection to a public water system or public sewer system shall be made until the plans for the planned development have been approved by the planning and zoning commission and so noted on prints of the development plan. 
8.1.4.  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning commission that the street and parcel proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(a)  All streets within a planned development must be paved according to current county specifications. 
(b)  Special requirements may be imposed by the planning and zoning commission and governing authority with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
(c)  Special requirements may be imposed by the planning and zoning commission and governing authority with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage. 
(d)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
(e)  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas. 
ARTICLE IX. - VARIANCES 

9.1. - Variances. 
When, due to unnecessary or undue hardship experienced by an owner of a tract of land, it is impractical for a developer to comply with the interpretations of the design requirements of these regulations, the planning and zoning commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements provided the intent and purpose of these regulations are not violated. Such variations, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered into the minutes of the planning and zoning commission. Provided, however, that the following variances must be approved by the board of commissioners upon recommendation from the planning and zoning commission: (a) any variance from the exemption from paving requirements stated in section 6.6; (b) any variance from the requirements for water supply and distribution systems stated in section 6.1 or section 6.2.2. 
(Ord. of 6-1-99; Ord. of 2-6-01) 
ARTICLE X. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

10.1. - Filing and recording. 
No plat of a subdivision within Bulloch County shall be filed or recorded by the county clerk of the court until the final plat shall have been submitted to the building and zoning official and approved in accordance with these regulations. 
10.2. - Unauthorized conveyances. 
No lot, street, alley, improvement, easement, right-of-way or other property or property right of any kind shall be conveyed, by deed or otherwise, to the county, the governing authority or other public authority without its express acceptance of such conveyance as indicated by the signature of its authorized agent on such deed or other document of conveyance. 
10.3, 10.4. - Reserved. 
10.5. - Schedule of filing fees. 
Fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be paid in connection with applications. 
(Amend. of 10-3-06) 
ARTICLE XI. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

11.1. - Prior approval. 
No construction or land disturbing activity of any kind, including grading, installation of improvements, or building shall begin on any land subject to these regulations without prior approval and implementation of the preliminary plat and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan where required by local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
11.2. - Grading and land-disturbing activity. 
Where applicable, grading and land-disturbing operations may commence once approval of the preliminary plat and issuance of the land disturbing activity permit are granted. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures prescribed in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan must be installed prior to any land-disturbing or grading activity where applicable. 
11.3. - Utilities. 
Utility installation shall not occur until the county engineer has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation. 
11.4. - Inspections. 
Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the building and zoning official and county engineer to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the building and zoning official when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
11.5. - Sale and transfer. 
No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
11.6. - Construction standards. 
A building or structure shall be considered substandard if or when it does not meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code of Georgia, or any other code or ordinance adopted by the county or its governing authority. 
11.7. - Building permits. 
The building official shall not issue any permit for the construction of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision or planned development until the required plat has been approved and recorded as provided for in these regulations. 
11.8. - Occupancy. 
Within each phase of development, no building may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes nor shall an occupancy permit be issued for any building until all roads and required utility installations, including water supply and sanitary sewer systems, have been completed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
ARTICLE XII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

12.1. - Filing or recording. 
The filing or recording of a final plat of a subdivision without the approval required by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any sketch plan or preliminary plat as a "record" plat, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law. 
12.2. - Recording official. 
The county clerk of court shall not accept, file, or record any sketch plan or any preliminary plat as a "record" plat, or any final record plat involving any area subject to these regulations which has not been approved according to these regulations. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section, he shall in each instance be subject to the penalty provided in this article and the governing authority shall have such rights and remedies as to enforcement or collection as provided and may enjoin any violations thereof. 
12.3. - Transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the county to transfer or sell or agree to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat or subdivision of such land before such final plat has been duly approved and recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in and for the county. The description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from the requirements of this subsection. The county may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
12.4. - Erection of buildings. 
Any building erected in violation of these regulations shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official or other official designated by the board of commissioners may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
12.5. - Street names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or in any deed or instrument, without first obtaining the approval of the governing authority. 
ARTICLE XIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

13.1. - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in this document shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience and welfare of the general public. 
13.2. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
Whenever the requirements made under authority of these regulations impose higher standards than are required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
13.3. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a declaration shall not affect the ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
13.4. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
13.5. - Amendments. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consider and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners on any amendment to these regulations. The planning and zoning commission, at its option, may hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations. Recommendations of the planning and zoning commission shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment to these regulations prior to its adoption, notice of which shall be given not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days prior to the hearing date. The notice of the hearing shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
13.6. - Savings provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the county under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the county or its governing authority except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
13.7. - Effective date. 
This ordinance is adopted to amend certain provisions of the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations previously adopted on November 3, 1992 (the "original ordinance"). The original ordinance shall remain valid and effective in all respects, except for those provisions that are amended by this ordinance. Those provisions of this ordinance that amend the original ordinance shall be effective November 4, 1997. The effective date for those provisions of the original ordinance that have not been amended remains their original effective date. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

14.1. - Organization. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the governing authority to serve for overlapping three-year terms or until their successor has been appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the governing authority upon written notice and an opportunity to be heard. The governing authority shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Amend. of 3-6-07) 
14.2. - Procedure. 
The planning and zoning commission shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary, each of whom shall serve for one year or until he is re-elected or his successor is elected. The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
14.3. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held monthly, at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the planning and zoning commission determines. The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The planning and zoning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the clerk of the board of county commissioners and shall be a matter of public record. 
14.4. - Filing. 
The planning and zoning commission shall require an applicant to furnish such additional information as it deems necessary when filing an application and may require specific forms to be used. 
14.5. - Interpretations. 
The planning and zoning commission shall interpret requests in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of these regulations. 
14.6. - Specific limitations of powers of the planning and zoning commission. 
The planning and zoning commission does not have the power to amend these subdivision regulations, or to declare these regulations or any amendment hereto invalid, or to allow any use not permitted by these regulations. 
The planning and zoning commission shall grant variances only as extraordinary circumstances shall require within the spirit and purpose of these regulations. 
The fact that a financial hardship will be suffered if a variance is not granted is of itself insufficient grounds for granting a variance. 
14.7. - Approvals. 
The governing authority may uphold, reverse, add, delete, or modify with conditions any recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
APPENDIX C - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance for Bulloch County, Georgia adopted November 1, 1994, and as amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997. Amendments to the original ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the section remains unchanged from the original zoning ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Words and phrases enclosed in brackets [ ] have been added by the editor for clarity and are not part of the official ordinance as adopted by Bulloch County, Georgia. Prior to its amendment in its entirety by Ord. No. 1997-38, App. C, §§ 101—106, 201—203, 301, 302, 401—419, 500—504, 601—604, 701—704, 801—804, 901—904, 1001—1004, 1101—1104, 1201—1205, 1401—1404, 1501—1504, 1601—1604, 1701—1704, 1801—1804, 1901—1904, 2001—2003, 2301—2306, 2401—2405, 2501—2505, was amended by Ord. No. 1995-34, adopted Oct. 3, 1995. 
Cross reference— Environment protection, Ch. 6.5; flood damage prevention, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 8; signs, Ch. 11; subdivision regulations, App. B. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

Section 101. - Short title. 
This document is entitled "The Zoning Ordinance of Bulloch County, Georgia." It may also be known by and cited by the short title of "Bulloch County Zoning Ordinance." 
Section 102. - Authority. 
The power of a local government to enact an ordinance such as this, which is intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, is provided by the provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 103. - Jurisdiction. 
This appendix applies to all land within the unincorporated areas of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Section 104. - Purposes. 
(a)  The zoning ordinance of this county seeks to encourage the development of desirable land use patterns within the county in accordance with the county comprehensive plan. The promotion of sound land use patterns is intended to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of certain conditions that can threaten the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the county. This appendix should serve the following purposes: 
(1)  Reduce the occurrence of hazardous traffic patterns and general congestion. 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers. 
(3)  Assure that adequate light and air is provided. 
(4)  Prevent the overcrowding of land, urban sprawl, and undue concentration of population. 
(5)  Facilitate the adequate provision of public utilities, the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements and facilities. 
(6)  Promote adequate living conditions and sustained suitability of neighborhoods. 
(7)  Protect property against blight and depreciation. 
(8)  Promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the size of yards, courts, and the use of other open spaces, the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other purposes. 
(9)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures and for other purposes. 
(b)  Additional benefits to the public interest that can accrue from the development of sound land use patterns are as follows: 
(1)  Efficient development and use of community utility networks. 
(2)  Economy in governmental expenditures. 
(3)  A higher level of convenience, order, prosperity, and aesthetics. 
Section 105. - Content. 
This appendix provides for the following: 
(1)  Defines certain terms used in this appendix. 
(2)  Establishes certain land use districts and specifies the boundaries of those districts. 
(3)  Provides procedures for administering and amending the ordinance. 
(4)  Regulates the erection, alteration, and use of buildings and structures. 
(5)  Provides penalties for violation of this appendix. 
(6)  Defines the powers and duties, as they relate to this appendix, of the board of commissioners, as well as such administrative officers, bodies, and agencies as the board of commissioners may establish for the efficient exercise of the zoning powers of the county under provisions specified in the Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 36-66. 
(7)  Repeals conflicting ordinances. 
Section 106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005 repealed section 106 in its entirety. Former section 106 pertained to related uniform development ordinances and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 

Section 201. - Interpretation of certain common terms. 
Common terms. When used in this appendix, the following words and phrases have the meaning as defined in this article. Terms not defined here have the same meaning as is found in American Heritage College Dictionary, Copyright 1993, 3rd edition, here consistent with the context. The terms "must," "will," and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "developer" includes a "firm," "corporation," "co-partnership," "association," "institution," or "person." The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include in its meaning the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed," "to be used" or "occupied." 
Section 202. - General definitions. 
Accessory uses: Accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They may not be located closer than ten feet to any property line in AG5, R80, R40, R25 and R15 zoning districts or five feet in R2, R3, PUD, HC, GC, NC, LI and HI zoning districts; however, this requirement does not apply to fences. 
(2)  Accessory buildings not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(3)  They must be located in the rear or side yard; however, this requirement does not apply to fences. Not applicable in HC, GC, LI and HI zoning districts. 
Administrative officer: The person appointed by the county manager of the county to serve as the officer for administration of this zoning ordinance. 
Administrative variance: A variance which may be granted by the zoning administrator. 
Adult entertainment: As defined in chapter 4.5 of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Agriculture: The production, raising, breeding, or maintenance of plants and animals including, but not limited to: forage and sod crops; grain and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef, cattle, sheep, swine, horses, or goats, game animals, exotic fish, and any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such species; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruit of all kinds, including grapes, nuts, berries; vegetables, nursery; floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or land devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program on tracts of land at least five acres in size, including all associated activities. Retail selling of products raised on the premises is permitted provided that space necessary for the parking of customers' vehicles is provided off the public right-of-way. This does not include the commercial slaughter of poultry, livestock, or other animals. 
(1)  In relation to the treatment of agricultural facilities and operations as nuisances, Georgia Law provides in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(a) that "it is the declared policy of the state to conserve, protect, and encourage the development and improvement of its agricultural land and facilities for the production of food and other agricultural products. When nonagricultural land uses extend into agricultural areas, agricultural operations often become the subject of nuisance actions. As a result, agricultural facilities are sometimes forced to cease operations. Many others are discouraged from making investments in farm improvements or adopting new technology or methods. It is the purpose of this Code section to reduce losses of the state's agricultural resources by limiting the circumstances under which agricultural facilities and operations may be deemed to be a nuisance." 
(2)  The Code further states in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(c) that "no agricultural facility or any agricultural operation at an agricultural facility shall be or shall become a nuisance, either public or private, as a result of changed conditions in or around the locality of such agricultural facility if the agricultural facility has been in operation for one year or more. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when a nuisance results from the negligent, improper, or illegal operation of any agricultural facility." 
(3)  The code further states in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(d) that "for the purposes of this Code section, the established date of operation is the date on which an agricultural operation commenced operation. If the physical facilities of the agricultural operation are subsequently expanded or new technology adopted, the established date of operation for each change is not a separately and independently established date of operation and the commencement of the expanded operation does not divest the agricultural operation of a previously established date of operation." 
Air ambulance services: Providing emergency transportation and medical assistance in an aircraft that is certified as an ambulance and includes equipment, supplies, and trained staff necessary for administering emergency medical procedures. 
Airport (public, private, commercial): A transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land. Standards include the following: 
(1)  Applicant must comply with all federal and state laws and regulations and submits evidence of FAA approval or satisfactorily demonstrates that FAA approval is not required. In HI zoning district the definition includes: related facilities customarily found in airports, such as: car rental agencies, facilities for the servicing, repair and maintenance of aircraft, restaurants, newsstands, gift shops, when located within the passenger terminal building, warehouses, and storage buildings for air-freight and bulk storage for flammable liquids. 
Airstrip (private): An area designated for the takeoff and landing of private, noncommercial aircraft, with no terminal facilities and no scheduled take-offs and landings. See airport definition for applicable standards. 
Antenna, dish: An outside structure intended for receiving audio or video signals via a satellite orbiting the earth. It is constructed of a round or square surface that is parabolically curved focusing on a low-noise signal amplifier and the apparatus is mounted on a base. Such antennas must meet the following development standards as well as all other applicable regulations. 
(1)  They must not exceed a size of 18 feet in diameter or exceed the height limitations for the district in which they are located. 
Antenna (noncommercial): A vertical structure used for receiving and sending satellite, television or radio transmissions for personal use. 
Appliance repair and maintenance: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in repairing and servicing household appliances without retailing new appliances, such as refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, clothes dryers, and room air-conditioners. 
Automotive oil change and lubrication shop: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in changing motor oil and lubricating the chassis of automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans. 
Automotive repair: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing: (1) a wide range of mechanical and electrical repair and maintenance services for automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, and vans, motorcycles, and all trailers or (2) engine repair and replacement. The following development standards apply: 
(1)  All body work and painting must be conducted within a fully enclosed building. 
(2)  No open storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, or supplies visible beyond the premises is permitted. 
Automotive sales, parts and accessories store: This use comprises one or more of the following: 
(1)  Establishments known as automotive supply stores primarily engaged in retailing new, used, and/or rebuilt automotive parts and accessories; 
(2)  Automotive supply stores that are primarily engaged in both retailing automotive parts and accessories and repairing automobiles; 
(3)  Establishments primarily engaged in retailing and installing automotive accessories [This use does not include the sales, dismantling, or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles]; and 
(4)  Establishments selling new or used vehicles. 
Automotive towing: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These establishments may provide incidental services, such as storage and emergency road repair services. Any vehicle storage shall be fenced and screened. 
Banking: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in accepting demand and other deposits and making commercial, industrial, and consumer loans. 
Bed and breakfast inn: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing short-term lodging in facilities known as bed and breakfast inns. These establishments provide short-term lodging in private homes or small buildings converted for this purpose. Bed and breakfast inns are characterized by a highly personalized service and inclusion of a full breakfast in the room rate. 
Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of the county. 
Boarding house: An establishment, other than a hotel or motel, which furnishes lodging for compensation to more than four but fewer than twenty persons and which, for the period of occupancy, may serve as a principal residence. These establishments may also provide complementary services, such as housekeeping, meals, and laundry services; provided, however, that cooking must be done in a central kitchen and not in individual rooms or suites. These establishments include, but are not limited to, fraternity houses, sorority houses, rooming houses, and similar facilities. 
Boat house: A house or shed for sheltering one or more boats which must be the property of the owner of the tract of land. (Shall conform to accessory building standards.) 
Buffer: A landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses. 
Buildable area: That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear yard setbacks required for the district have been subtracted from the total area. 
Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building, accessory: A structure used for a purpose that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and located on the same lot as such a principal use or structure. 
Building and zoning official: One or more persons, officers or officials or his authorized representative, whom the county manager has appointed to administer and enforce individually or collectively, the building code, subdivision, and zoning ordinances. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to that elevation equal to the elevation of the highest point of the building. 
Building line: A line extended along the foundation of a building from which is measured the distance that a building must be set back to meet the minimum distance from the building line to the front, rear or side property line or in some cases, to the center line of an adjacent roadway. 
Building material dealer: The use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing specialized lines of new building materials, such as lumber, fencing, glass, doors, plumbing fixtures and supplies, electrical supplies, prefabricated buildings and kits, and kitchen and bath cabinets and countertops to be installed. 
Building, principal: The building on a lot in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Building site: The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
Bulk propane facility: Any facility where the primary function is to store LP-gas prior to further distribution, where LP-gas is received by cargo tank motor vehicle and distributed by portable container (package) delivery, or by cargo tank motor vehicle. 
(1)  Tanks over 1,000 gallons must be buried or mounded in accordance with best engineering practices. 
(2)  No such facility shall be established on a lot less than one acre in size. 
(3)  All tanks must be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line, and any point of transfer of propane from a tank to a vehicle must be at least 50 feet from any property line. 
(4)  No such facility shall contain more than 30,000 gallons of total bulk storage. 
(5)  All tanks shall be screened from adjacent properties. 
Bus station/taxi service: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing bus passenger transportation over regular routes and on regular schedules, as well as, establishments primarily engaged in providing passenger transportation by automobile or van, not operated over regular routes and on regular schedules. 
Camper: A motor home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle designed for recreational purposes. This type of vehicle shall not be considered as a permanent habitable space. 
Cemetery: Land either already reserved for burial plots or which may, in the future, be so reserved; it may be maintained either by a family, a church or other place of worship, or a private corporation. 
(1)  A cemetery must be located on a lot with a minimum size of 1/8 acre and a maximum size of ½ acre; provided, however, that a cemetery may be located on the same lot as a church, synagogue, chapel or other place of religious worship. 
(2)  The property line of the lot on which a cemetery is located must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any public road, street, right-of-way, or adjacent property line. 
(3)  A cemetery must maintain a permanent nonilluminated sign identifying the name of the cemetery. 
(4)  A cemetery must be enclosed by a chain-link or wooden fence at least four feet in height. 
(5)  All graves in a cemetery must be identified with permanent grave markers. 
(6)  Provided, however, that these development standards shall not apply to cemeteries governed by the Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000 codified at Chapter 14 of Title 10 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Center line, street: That line surveyed and monumented by the governing authority as the center line of a street, or if such a center line has not been surveyed, it is the line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Children's playhouse: A structure including but not limited to a jungle gym, monkey bars or climbing frame, made of many pieces of thin material, such as metal pipe or rope, on which children can climb, hang, or sit. Also includes tree houses built and used for recreation. 
Church: A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, which is used for such purpose, along with any accessory activities, such as school, and as are customarily associated therewith. Churches shall include: synagogues, chapel, or other places of worship including educational buildings, parsonages, church-related nurseries or kindergartens, and other related uses. Standards for churches include the following: 
(1)  It must be located on either an arterial or collector road. 
(2)  The lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet (except in a MHP district). 
(3)  No church building shall be located within 100 yards of any establishment that has been licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(4)  In R80, R40, R25, R15, R2, R3 and MHP districts, the lot must have an area of at least two and one-half acres, unless a cemetery is adjacent then five acre lot size is required. 
(5)  In R80, R40, R25 and R15 districts, off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in the parking section of this section. 
(6)  Setbacks for churches (where no cemetery is developed). 

 
City: Any incorporated municipality in the county. 
Civic and social organization: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in promoting the civic and social interests of their members [e.g., lodges and clubs]. AG-5 zoning district also allows places for an assembly of nonmembers groups provided such use is located on property that fronts a county, state or federal road or highway. 
Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment (except automotive and electronic) sales, repair and maintenance: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in the sales, repair and maintenance of commercial and industrial machinery and equipment. Establishments in this industry either sharpen/install commercial and industrial machinery blades and saws or provide welding (e.g., automotive, general) repair services; or repair agricultural and other heavy and industrial machinery and equipment (e.g., forklifts and other materials handling equipment, machine tools, commercial refrigeration equipment, construction equipment, and mining machinery). 
Community center: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing nonresidential social assistance services to improve the quality of life for the children, youth, elderly, persons diagnosed with mental retardation, or persons with disabilities. These establishments provide for the welfare of these individuals in such areas as nonmedical home care or homemaker services, social activities, group support, and companionship, adoption and foster care, drug prevention, life skills training, and positive social development. No community center building shall be located within 100 yards of any establishment that has been licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. Distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
Community office: This use includes establishments renting real estate to others and/or managing the property. 
Conditional use: A use, specifically designated in this zoning ordinance, that may cause harmful or undesirable effects on surrounding or nearby properties within a given zoning district, but would in the opinion of the board of commissioners promote the public health, safety, morals, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare if such uses were controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood or upon any other standard provided by this zoning ordinance. 
Condominium: A lot developed in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Condominium Act codified at O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq. 
Contractor: A person or firm that contracts to perform work, provide supplies, or contracts to erect buildings. A contractor is permitted to have open storage of materials and equipment when located in rear yard. 
Conventional construction: A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site. Each unit shall have a heated floor area of at least 975 square feet and be compatible with other conventional construction which may be permitted in the same general area, or existing development, or proposed development in the same zoning classification or area, or as set forth in the comprehensive plan of the county. 
Cottage industry: A small business enterprise or activity where the family unit who owns or operates the business resides, and, which is typically greater in scale or intensity than that of a home occupation, but, less than what would be required to be located in a commercial or industrial zoning district: 
(1)  The following list of uses allowable as cottage industries is illustrative only and is not intended to be exhaustive: sales of antiques and collectibles, art or photography studios, computer software development, handicrafts, ironworking or blacksmith shop, construction or trades office, furniture repair or refinishing, pottery shop, real estate sales office, small equipment repair, woodworking shop, excavating contractors, small engine and boat repair. 
(2)  Performance standards for cottage industries permitted as appurtenant and accessory uses. 
a.  The cottage industry shall conform to the development standards in the applicable zoning district, except as provided below. 
b.  The cottage industry must be owned and operated by the owner of the property upon which the cottage industry is to be located, or the business owner must have written approval of the owner of the property, if the applicant is a tenant. 
c.  The appurtenant and accessory structure used as a cottage industry shall not occupy a total area greater than 2,400 square feet. 
d.  All activity related to the conduct of the business or industry, except for activities related to the growing and storing of plants, shall be conducted within an enclosed structure or be sufficiently screened from view of adjacent residences. A buffer may be required by the zoning administrator if it is determined that the use needs to be sufficiently screened from view of adjacent residences, using site location, topography, landscaping, fencing, the retention of native vegetation, or a combination thereof. 
e.  No cottage industry shall be located on a lot less than 80,000 square feet in size, regardless of whether the lot was a lot of record at the time of the original passage of this section (November 4, 1994). 
f.  Except for outside storage of materials or equipment, all business operations, activities, and transactions associated with the cottage industry shall be conducted entirely within the primary dwelling unit and/or in an accessory building located on the same lot. No business operations, activities, or transactions shall be conducted in any portion of the lot not approved for cottage industry use by the county. 
g.  Business traffic (either by the business operators or business customers) is permitted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal in the neighborhood in which it is located. Traffic generated by the cottage industry shall not exceed the level of service adopted for the public roadway which accesses the use, nor generate significant traffic in excess of that normally generated by typical uses found within the particular district. 
h.  No business may provide drive-through service. 
i.  The use of more than six general purpose and/or heavy duty vehicles and the employment of more than six employees for exclusive use of the business are prohibited. In approving the conditional use, the number of vehicles that may be parked on the premises at any time may be limited and vehicles may be required to be kept behind an enclosed fenced or buffered area. 
j.  A permitted cottage industry shall maintain a service agreement with a competent waste handler chosen from a list provided by the hazardous waste management section of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, for the periodic removal and recycling of any batteries, gasoline, oil, transmission fluid, brake fluid, and other solvents and chemical agents. Interim storage of such materials shall be in a manner satisfactory to the county health department. The county public safety director shall verify the use or absence of hazardous materials for the cottage industry upon registration. 
k.  There shall be no parking or storage of damaged vehicles except on a temporary basis which is not to exceed 72 hours. Junk parts and junk vehicles shall not be kept outside the building. 
l.  No nuisances shall be produced including but not limited to smoke, glare, vibrations, noises, or odors that may be discernable by neighbors proximate to the dwelling unit. 
m.  There shall be no structural, electrical or plumbing alterations necessary for the cottage industry which are not customarily found in dwellings or residential accessory structures. 
n.  There shall be no outdoor display of merchandise on the premises. 
o.  All noise-generating operations shall be buffered. 
p.  All lights shall be directed on site and shielded to reduce glare to adjacent areas. 
q.  Business operations shall not cause any visual or audible interference with radio or television reception. 
r.  One sign is permitted advertising the cottage industry, not exceeding two square feet, that is nonmoving, and which has illumination, if any, which is nonflashing. 
s.  A cottage industry shall register for a county occupational tax certificate as may be required by all other businesses subject to such certification. 
County: Bulloch County. 
Curb cut: The point at which vehicular access is provided to an adjoining street from a lot. 
DCA: Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
Day care facility: A facility designed and intended to provide care for children under the age of 15 years for not more than 12 hours per day. The maximum number of children permitted at such center shall be the greater of six or the maximum number permitted by the rules established by the department of human resources for the state. Facility must comply with all applicable Georgia Department of Human Resources rules. 
(1)  Facilities, when permitted in residential districts, must have two or more acres of land and meet parking requirements. 
(2)  In AG5 district, a buffer must be provided along all side and rear property lines. 
(3)  In MHP district, the facility must have two or more acres. 
Deck/patio: A flat surface capable of supporting weight, similar to a floor, but typically constructed outdoors, often elevated from the ground, and usually connected to a building. 
Density: The number of units or buildings per acre, or the number of people per unit, building, acre or mile, the quantity of people, structures, or units within a specified area. 
Display advertising: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in creating and designing public display advertising campaign materials, such as printed, painted, or electronic displays; and/or placing such displays on indoor or outdoor billboards and panels, or on or within transit vehicles or facilities, shopping malls, retail (in-store) displays, and other display structures or sites. 
Domesticated animal: An animal that is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cows, dogs, cats, fowl, horses, swine, goats, rabbits, caged wild animals, and exotic animals. 
Drycleaning and laundry service: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in one or more of the following: 
(1)  Providing drycleaning services; 
(2)  Providing laundering services; 
(3)  Providing drop-off and pickup sites for laundries and/or drycleaners; and 
(4)  Providing specialty cleaning services for specific types of garments and other textile items (except carpets and upholstery), such as fur, leather, or suede garments; wedding gowns; hats; draperies; and pillows. 
These establishments may provide all, a combination of, or none of the cleaning services on the premises. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used principally for residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, boarding houses, or rooming houses. 
Dwelling, apartment: Three or more dwelling units, under a single ownership, designed for lease or rent and located on one lot of land designed and intended for lease or rental. 
Dwelling, cluster: One of a series of attached or detached dwelling units developed under a single ownership. 
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building designed, constructed, altered or used for three or more adjoining dwelling units. A multiple-family dwelling may be apartments or condominiums. Each unit shall have a heated floor area of at least 600 square feet per dwelling unit and be compatible with other conventional construction which may be permitted in the same general area, or existing development, or proposed development in the same zoning classification or area, or as set forth in the comprehensive plan of the county. 
Dwelling, single-family detached (site-built): A single site-built residential detached building designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
(1)  Each unit shall have a heated floor area of at least 975 square feet and be compatible with other conventional construction which may be permitted in the same general area, or existing development, or proposed development in the same zoning classification or area, or as set forth in the comprehensive plan of the county (Exception AG5 district). 
Dwelling, two-family: A detached dwelling designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall connecting it with the other dwelling unit, located on one lot; also known as a "duplex." Site-built and industrial homes shall have a heated floor area of at least 1,200 square feet. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 600 square feet each. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms within a dwelling forming a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for use of one family involving owner or renter occupancy, with provisions for cooking, eating, and sleeping. 
Easement: The right or privilege of using another's property, for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, ingress and egress. 
Education or training facility: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in offering an array of short duration courses and seminars. Training for career development may be provided directly to individuals or through employers' training programs; and courses may be customized or modified to meet the special needs of customers. Instruction may be provided in diverse settings, such as the establishment's or client's training facilities, educational institutions, the workplace, or the home, and through diverse means, such as correspondence, television, the Internet, or other electronic and distance-learning methods. The training provided by these establishments may include the use of simulators and simulation methods. 
Facilities to host private and public functions: This use includes buildings for hosting private and public functions, including, but not limited to, weddings, receptions, dinners, festivals and socials. 
Factory-built housing: An obsolete term used to describe an industrialized building. See definition of industrialized building. 
Family: Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or in foster care. 
(1)  No single dwelling unit located in a single-family residential zoning district shall have more than four unrelated individuals residing therein, nor shall any "family" have, additionally, more than four unrelated individuals residing with said family. 
(2)  When the dwelling is located in any zoning district other than a single-family residential district, one of the following is permitted: 
a.  Family related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster care may have two additional unrelated individuals; or 
b.  Unrelated individuals not exceeding four. 
(3)  In all cases, household employees employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or unrelated individual. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
(4)  Any nonconforming use created by the adoption of this definition of "family" shall be permitted to continue for a period of one year from November 4, 1994. After which period, the use of such dwellings(s) shall be in compliance herewith. 
Farm: Any tract or parcel of land containing five or more acres that is devoted to the raising of agricultural products, including, but not limited to, soil crops, livestock, dairying horticulture, poultry, fish, fowl, sod farming, farm forestry, and commercial timber and other similar bona fide agricultural enterprises (see "Agriculture") or use of land or structure regardless of the quantity or value of production. 
Farm supply store: This use includes farm supply stores and agricultural related businesses, such as agricultural implements sales and service, auction facilities, feed and grain stores and other businesses not involving sales or services to the general public, that fronts on a county, state, or federal road or highway and provided such buildings or uses are not located within 100 feet of an abutting property zoned R or MHP, or utilized for single-family residential or manufactured home use. 
Farm winery: As defined in Title 3, Chapter 6, Article 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, provided that a farm winery must maintain a farm winery alcohol license in accordance with chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances, must be located on a lot containing no less than 30 acres of land, and must produce no less than 2,000 gallons of wine annually. In granting a conditional use permit for a farm winery, the board of commissioners may specify allowable uses related or complementary to the operation of the farm winery other than the production and sale of wine. A farm winery that is granted a conditional use permit is prohibited from engaging in any use not specified in the conditional use permit (or otherwise allowed as a permitted use in the AG-5 zoning district) without applying for and being granted a modification of the conditional use permit by the board of commissioners. The following list of related or complementary uses that may be specified in a conditional use permit for a farm winery is not intended to be exhaustive but is merely illustrative of the types of uses the board of commissioners may consider in granting or modifying the conditional use permit: 
(1)  Facilities to host private and public functions, including, but not limited to, weddings, receptions, dinners, festivals and socials; 
(2)  Principal dwellings; 
(3)  Parks or open space which is privately owned, operated or maintained; 
(4)  Bed and breakfast inn; 
(5)  Restaurant; and 
(6)  Wedding chapel. 
Fence: A fence must meet the following standards: 
(1)  The fence must not be over four feet in height if located in the front yard of the street that the front of the dwelling faces. 
(2)  The fence must be chain link, decorative wood, decorative vinyl, or ornamental wrought iron. 
(3)  Any other fencing materials must be approved by the zoning administrator. 
Flag lot : A lot with road frontage no greater in width than one-half the required lot width for the applicable zoning district and with access to the bulk of the lot provided by means of a narrow corridor. For purposes of this definition, the access to the lot shall be considered a "narrow corridor" if the lines of the corridor diverge ten degrees or less. Flag lots shall be subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  Flag lots are only allowed in the AG-5 zoning district. 
(2)  No flag lot may be subdivided from a single lot or parcel of property with less than 500 feet of road frontage. 
(3)  With the exception of adjacent flag lots, no more than one flag lot shall be permitted to front on the same side of the road every 500 feet when subdividing a single lot or parcel of property. Provided however, that this distance requirement shall not be applicable to flag lots that are created from separate lots or parcels of property. For purposes of this provision, the distance shall be measured along the road between the nearest property lines. 
(4)  No more than two flag lots created from the same lot or parcel of property shall be permitted to be adjacent to one another. 
(5)  The limitations regarding road frontage, distance, and adjacent flag lots in subsections (2), (3), and (4) shall not be applicable to flag lots created pursuant to the provisions of subsection 503(15) of this chapter (the AG-5 Family Provision), provided that no more than five flag lots are created from a single lot or parcel pursuant to said provision. 
Flea market: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing merchandise via direct sale to the customer by truck or wagon sales, and portable stalls. 
Floodplain: That area delineated on the flood insurance rate map, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and as amended from time to time, which shows the boundary of the 100-year floodplain. 
Floor area: The area of a dwelling exclusive of attic, basement, garage, carport, patios, and open porches measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a dwelling. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
Food processing facility: Industrial operations in which raw food is made suitable for consumption, cooking or storage. Such facilities include commercial slaughterhouses for poultry, livestock, or other animals, and egg farms. 
Freight trucking: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing local and long-distance general freight trucking. General freight establishments handle a wide variety of commodities, generally palletized and transported in a container or van trailer. 
Fruit and vegetable market: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing fresh fruits and vegetables. 
Funeral homes and funeral service: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals (i.e., providing facilities for wakes, arranging transportation for the dead, selling caskets and related merchandise). Funeral homes combined with crematories are included in this industry. 
Garage or carport, private: A covered space for the storage of one or more motor vehicles belonging to the occupants of the principal use on the lot. No business, occupation or service may be conducted for profit within the private garage except a home occupation or a garage sale, provided the garage sale is not conducted on a regular basis as part of the occupation or business of the owner or occupant of the garage. In R3 district, garage shall not exceed the storage capacity of three automobiles per dwelling unit. 
Garden (Noncommercial): Includes greenhouse and other customary garden structures. 
(1)  R80, R40, R25, R15, and R2 districts: structures cannot be over twelve feet high. 
(2)  R3 district: structures cannot be over eight feet high. 
Gasoline station with convenience store: This use comprises establishments engaged in retailing automotive fuels (e.g., diesel fuel and gasoline) in combination with convenience store or food mart items. These establishments may also sell alcohol for off-premise consumption. 
General business: Commercial uses providing a wide range of retail goods and services to meet the needs of a large segment of the community. Any retail business that falls within this general definition but is otherwise more specifically defined in this section shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions imposed on the more specific definition. 
Golf course, tennis court and country club: This use comprises (1) establishments primarily engaged in operating golf courses (except miniature), (2) tennis courts and (3) establishments primarily engaged in operating golf courses, along with dining facilities and other recreational facilities that are known as country clubs. These establishments often provide food and beverage services, equipment rental services, and golf instruction services. Minimum standards for the golf course include: 
(1)  It must be for daytime use only. A driving range may be lighted for nighttime use, unless it would constitute a nuisance to adjacent properties or a hazard to nearby public rights-of-way. 
(2)  All buildings, greens, and fairways must be set back at least 50 feet from any property line. 
Government: Local, state, federal: Includes buildings, facilities or property owned, operated or used by Bulloch County, the State of Georgia or the United States of America. 
Grocery store: A retail store that sells food, beverages, and other household implements and supplies. 
Guard living quarters: Living quarters for security guard or caretaker associated with a manufacturing facility. 
Heavy manufacturing: Uses engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions that include, but are not limited to, smoke, steam, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, or any other byproduct of the manufacturing process that is known to be detrimental to the human or natural environment. These activities may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing process. Heavy manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to, storage of petroleum products; concrete or cement fabrication where raw materials and finished products are stored outside; pulpwood processing; asphalt manufacturing; recycling center; outdoor storage of solid waste; rock, sand, or gravel distribution or storage and other uses similar in nature. Any heavy manufacturing activity that falls within this general definition but is otherwise more specifically defined in this section shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions imposed on the more specific definition. 
Home and garden equipment sale, repair and maintenance: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in selling, repairing and servicing home and garden equipment [e.g., retailing new home and garden equipment, such as lawnmowers, handheld power tools, edgers, snow- and leaf-blowers, and trimmers]. 
Home occupation: An occupation for gain or support conducted by members of a family residing on the premises, and other employees, entirely within the principal or accessory building(s). The following standards must be met by all home occupations: 
(1)  No home occupation shall employ more than two persons who do not reside in the dwelling located on the premises. 
(2)  The home occupation must be incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling and must not change the residential character of the property. 
(3)  No display of products shall be visible from the street. 
(4)  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations, but are not limited to this list: accountant, addressing service, architect, art instructor, beauty shop (with no more than one operator), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, music instruction, (students: limited to two students at a time), teacher, notary public, photographer, real estate agent, and tax consultant. The following and similar uses are considered appropriate uses of accessory buildings for home occupations: artist or craftsman's work area, photographic darkroom, clock repair shop, gunsmith shop, laboratory, potter's shop, and basket weaver's shop. 
(5)  No internal or external alterations shall be permitted which would change the fire rating for the structure. 
a.  If an accessory structure is used for the business, the size of the accessory structure is limited to 25 percent of the square footage of the residential building. It shall be located behind the residential building with setback requirements of no less than 20 feet from the property line and 30 feet from the side yard. 
b.  One nonilluminated name plate, not more than two square feet in area may be attached to the building which shall contain only the name of the occupation conducted on the premises. 
c.  A home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to adjacent residential structures. This shall apply to noise, lighting, traffic, and unsightly outside storage, where applicable. 
(6)  No outside storage of materials or supplies used in connection with the home occupation shall be permitted. 
(7)  All parking for the home occupation shall be located on the property and only on the side or rear yards. 
(8)  Only vehicles designed and used primarily as passenger vehicles (including pickup trucks) shall be used in connection with home occupations in residential zoning districts. 
Hospice care facility: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services for terminally ill patients. The care is generally provided for an extended period of time to individuals requiring nursing care. These establishments have a permanent core staff of registered or licensed practical nurses who, along with other staff, provide nursing and continuous personal care services. 
Hospital: This use comprises establishments known and licensed as general medical and surgical hospitals primarily engaged in providing diagnostic and medical treatment (both surgical and nonsurgical) to inpatients with any of a wide variety of medical conditions. These establishments maintain inpatient beds and provide patients with food services that meet their nutritional requirements. These hospitals have an organized staff of physicians and other medical staff to provide patient care services. These establishments usually provide other services, such as outpatient services, anatomical pathology services, diagnostic X-ray services, clinical laboratory services, operating room services for a variety of procedures, and pharmacy services. 
Hotel and motel: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing short-term lodging in facilities known as hotels, motor hotels, resort hotels, and motels. The establishments in this industry may offer food and beverage services, recreational services, conference rooms and convention services, laundry services, parking, and other services. 
HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Industrialized Building: A home manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State-approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner. 
Inert landfill: Site must be geotechnically suitable as defined by the State of Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act 1990. An inert landfill shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act of 1990, as amended. All inert landfills must obtain all state, federal or local permits that are applicable. 
Intermediate care home: A facility that admits residents on medical referral. It maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-9: Intermediate Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). 
ISO intermodal steel container: Structure for the storage and maintenance of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its grounds. Must meet the following standards: 
(1)  The floor of the container is elevated at least one foot off the ground. 
(2)  The container must be adequately screened from view from any public road. 
(3)  The container must be maintained in good condition, free of rust and holes (AG5, HC and GC districts only). 
(4)  One container cannot be connected to another container; provided, however, that containers which are connected only by a roof or awning shall not violate this provision. 
(5)  Two per five acres (maximum of five per lot) in AG district. 
Junk yard, salvage yard, and auto wrecking yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, structure materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, used vehicles or equipment in inoperative condition, or similar items are bought, sold, exchanged or stored, baled or cleaned. Also includes the parking, storage or disassembly of three or more junked vehicles, or wrecked or nonoperable automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles that do not bear a current license plate. 
Kennel (commercial): The housing for four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing an income or revenue. All structures must be set back 200 feet from all property lines. 
Laundromat: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in: 
(1)  Operating facilities with coin-operated or similar self-service laundry and drycleaning equipment for customer use on the premises; and/or 
(2)  Supplying and servicing coin-operated or similar self-service laundry and drycleaning equipment for customer use in places of business operated by others, such as apartments and dormitories. 
Light manufacturing: Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment, or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or previously manufactured materials, or materials fully encapsulated in a sealed container, including but not limited to, jars, cans, drums, or other container of a similar nature, to be stored inside. Light industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, steam, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, or any other byproduct of the manufacturing process that is known to be detrimental to the human or natural environment. Light manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to, machine shops, manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic equipment and computer components, camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and toiletries, business machines, food, paper products (excluding the manufacture of paper from pulpwood), medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (excluding the processing of raw materials), pharmaceuticals or optical goods, and any other product of a similar nature. Any light manufacturing activity that falls within this general definition but is otherwise more specifically defined in this section shall be subject to the requirements and restrictions imposed on the more specific definition. 
Loading space: Space logically and conveniently located for pickup and delivery service, scaled to the vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles at all times. 
Lot: Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official county zoning maps or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. If the lot is a corner lot, the lot width shall be the distance between the lot lines measured along the front building line. 
Machine shop: This use comprises establishments known as machine shops primarily engaged in machining metal and plastic parts and parts of other composite materials on a job or order basis. Generally machine shop jobs are low volume using machine tools, such as lathes (including computer numerically controlled); automatic screw machines; and machines for boring, grinding, and milling. 
Maintenance building/shed: This use includes a structure for storage of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its ground. 
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. 
(1)  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
(2)  Manufactured homes located on manufactured home sales lots shall have 60 days to meet the requirements of section 9.5(e) of the manufactured home ordinance. 
(3)  In R80, R40, R25, R15, R2, and R3 districts, a manufactured home must have a heated floor space of at least 975 square feet and be compatible with conventional construction which may be permitted in the same general area, or existing development, or proposed development in the same zoning classification or area, or as set forth in the comprehensive plan of the county. 
(4)  One parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of five or more manufactured homes for residential occupancy shall be considered a manufactured home park and placed in a manufactured home park zoning district. 
Manufactured home for temporary use at construction site: The temporary manufactured home must be removed within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the principal building. No more than one such unit is permitted per lot for residential construction. 
Manufactured home or industrialized home dealer: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing new and/or used manufactured homes, industrialized homes, parts, and equipment. 
Manufactured home, pre-HUD: Any manufactured home that was not constructed to the HUD code, which was adopted June 1976. All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. No permit shall be issued for a pre-HUD manufactured home. 
Manufactured home space: An area of land within a planned manufactured home community designed to accommodate one manufactured home. 
Manufactured housing: A general term used to describe a type of housing that is produced, either completely or partially in a factory, including manufactured homes, modular homes, and industrialized buildings. 
Manufacturing (commercial districts): Includes manufacturing in connection with the principal retail business or service on the lot in commercial zoning districts. The intent is to assure that activities which are primarily manufacturing in nature are directed away from commercial zoning districts and into manufacturing zoning districts. Standards include the following: 
(1)  Occupies less than 40 percent of the floor area. 
(2)  Employs no more than five persons. (Establishments with five or fewer manufacturing employees in connection with a commercial activity are considered to be primarily commercial and compatible with a commercial district. Manufacturing activities with more than five employees would be considered large enough to belong in a manufacturing district with other such uses rather than in a commercial district.) 
Marina (commercial): This use comprises establishments engaged in operating docking and/or storage facilities for pleasure craft owners, with or without one or more related activities, such as retailing fuel and marine supplies; and repairing, maintaining, or renting pleasure boats. A marina must be located on a minimum of 45,000 square feet. 
Miniwarehouse and self-storage units: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in renting or leasing space for self-storage. These establishments provide secure space (i.e., rooms, compartments, lockers, containers, or outdoor space) where clients can store and retrieve their goods. 
Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. (Ga. L. 1968, p. 415, § 2; Ga. L. 1973, p. 4, § 2; Code 1981, § 8-2-131; Ga. L. 1982, p. 1376, §§ 3, 7; Ga. L. 1989, p. 14, § 8; Ga. L. 1992, p. 2750, § 1.). 
Mobile home park: A term used to describe a planned manufactured home park. See definition of planned manufactured home community. 
Mobile office: The use of a mobile office for construction administration is permitted in commercial and industrial districts during the construction of the principal use. The mobile office must be removed within 30 days of certificate of occupancy of the principal use. 
Modular home: A factory-fabricated single-family dwelling that is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of industrialized building. 
Multi-section home: A term used to describe a manufactured home finished in two or more sections. 
Museum or exhibit area: Museum or exhibit area in conjunction with an area or use of recognized historical, aesthetic, or educational significance, provided that no commercial activities other than the possible collection of an admission fee, are associated with said museum or exhibit area. 
National Manufactured Housing Construction and safety standards: The national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; also known as the "HUD Code." 
Natural resource development: Includes the removal of minerals and natural materials (includes appurtenant buildings and machinery). The owners or operators of the mine or quarry must present to the zoning administrator documentation which confirms that a permit has been issued in accordance with the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
Nursery, garden center, and farm supply store: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod. Also included in this industry are establishments primarily engaged in retailing farm supplies, such as animal (nonpet) feed. Farm supply stores are a conditional use in the AG-5 zoning district. 
Nursing home: A facility that admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision. It maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-8: Nursing Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). 
Office park: An area of land in which many office buildings are grouped together. 
Open space: An area that is intended to provide light and air and within which a structure is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
Outdoor advertising sign: A sign which conveys a commercial message directing attention to or promoting a business commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than upon the premises on which the sign is located. Also referred to as a billboard. 
(1)  Must comply with D.O.T. standards, if applicable, the county sign ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances. 
Outdoor storage: The storage of large quantities of materials or products associated with an industry or business. Such storage will often require a structure designed for and/or devoted to the containment of the item. 
Parking lot and garage: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing parking space for motor vehicles, usually on an hourly, daily, or monthly basis and/or valet parking services. 
Parking space: The storage space for one motor vehicles. 
Personal care home: A building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services—including rooms, meals, and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in Chapter 290-5-35: Personal Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). For the purpose of this section, Personal Care Homes are classified as follows: 
(1)  Family personal care home: A home for adults in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
(2)  Group personal care home: A home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), noninstitutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
(3)  Congregate personal care home: A home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Planned apartment home community: A lot used as a residential area occupied by apartment homes and conforming to an approved development plan, with appropriate and adequate community services, recreation facilities, utilities, streets, and sidewalks provided by the developer. 
Planned manufactured home community: A lot used as a residential area occupied by manufactured homes and conforming to an approved development plan, with appropriate and adequate community services, recreation facilities, utilities, streets, and sidewalks provided by the developer, where the resident owns or rents the manufactured home and rents the manufactured home space. All manufactured homes located within a manufactured home community must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., and all manufactured home communities shall be designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of article 9 of this section. 
Planned residential development: A lot conforming to an approved development plan and used as a residential area occupied by single-family dwelling units with a minimum heated floor area of 975 square feet, two-family dwellings with a minimum heated floor area of 600 square feet per dwelling unit, multifamily dwellings with a minimum heated floor area of 600 square feet per dwelling unit, or some combination thereof. For purposes of this definition, the term "approved development plan" means the submission and approval of a sketch plan, preliminary plan, and final plat in accordance with the requirements for subdivisions in appendix B-subdivision regulations. Density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre and individual buildings must be separated by not less than ten feet. Ownership of dwelling units may be transferred. Ground areas must remain under common ownership of the developer or an association for purposes of maintenance and upkeep; provided, however, that ground areas around a dwelling unit may be transferred to the owner of the dwelling unit if the developer or association retains an easement for the purpose of maintaining and upkeeping the grounds. The developer or association must retain responsibility for maintenance and repair of septic systems serving more than one dwelling unit, either through ownership of the septic system or through an easement allowing the developer or association to maintain and repair the septic system. 
Planning and zoning commission: The county planning and zoning commission. 
Plat: A map, plan, or layout of a county, city, town, section, or subdivision or lot indicating the location and boundaries of properties prepared and stamped by a registered surveyor. 
Prefabricated home: A general term used to describe any home constructed in a factory setting including manufactured homes, modular homes, and industrialized buildings. 
Printing/publishing: An establishment where printed material is produced, reproduced and/or copied by either a printing press, photographic reproduction techniques, or other similar techniques. 
Professional offices: A building providing office space for professional services (e.g., health care, financial, insurance, legal, real estate, etc.). 
Public sewer: Sanitary sewer service provided by the county or the City of Statesboro. 
Public water: Water service provided by the county, the City of Statesboro, or a private water system approved by the department of natural resources. 
Radio station: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in broadcasting aural programs by radio to the public. Programming may originate in their own studio, from an affiliated network, or from external sources. 
Rail transportation: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing specialized services for railroad transportation including servicing, routine repairing (except factory conversion, overhaul or rebuilding of rolling stock), and maintaining rail cars; loading and unloading rail cars; and operating independent terminals. 
Recreation facility (commercial): This use includes commercial unenclosed recreation facilities such as: archery ranges, campgrounds, fairgrounds, paintball fields/facilities, fire arms shooting range, golf driving ranges, and race tracks for animals or automobiles, provided such uses are located on property with frontage on a county, state, or federal road or highway and provided such uses are not located within 100 feet of an abutting property zoned R or MHP or utilized for single-family residential or manufactured home residential use. 
Recreation facility (private): A common area that is set aside for leisure activities that are usually formal in nature and intended for group participation. Such activities typically require equipment and take place at prescribed places, sites, or fields, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis, volleyball, and basketball courts, and baseball, soccer, or other playing fields. 
Recreational vehicle park and campground: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in operating sites to accommodate campers and their equipment, including tents, tent trailers, travel trailers, and RVs (recreational vehicles). These establishments may provide access to facilities, such as washrooms, laundry rooms, recreation halls and playgrounds, stores, and snack bars. 
Recycling center: A facility which may be held in public and/or private ownership and which is designated to sort and process materials (aluminum cans, glass, newspaper, tin, HPDE and PET plastics), which have been separated from waste normally discharged into sanitary landfills and sold for re-use in other markets (see heavy manufacturing). 
Research and technology park: The facility which may be held in public or private ownership to facilitate the efficient transfer of technology, proprietary information, and inventions to the private sector. 
Restaurant: A structure that prepares and serves food to customers, including sit down, fast food, drive-through, and drive-in facilities. Some establishments in this industry may provide these food services in combination with selling alcoholic beverages. 
Right-of-way line: The boundary of a strip of land designed, reserved, dedicated, or acquired for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access. 
Roadside stand: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in sale of agricultural products grown on the premises, with a floor area not exceeding 500 square feet. 
Sawmill: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in sawing dimension lumber, boards, beams, timbers, poles, ties, shingles, shakes, siding, and wood chips from logs or bolts. Sawmills may plane the rough lumber that they make with a planing machine to achieve smoothness and uniformly of size. 
School: Schools must be located on either an arterial or collector road and the lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
(1)  Setbacks for schools include the following. 
(2)  Schools in MHP must have a minimum of five acres. 

 
Sectional home: A general term used to describe any home constructed in a factory setting, especially manufactured homes. 
Security service, private: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in providing guard and patrol services, such as bodyguard, guard dog, and parking security services. 
Service establishment catering to industry: This use includes services establishment catering to industry such as: advertising agencies, janitorial services, personnel agencies; data processing service; research, development and testing laboratories; private security agencies; rental and leasing services for all types of equipment. 
Shopping center: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in acting as lessors of buildings (except miniwarehouses and self-storage units) that are not used as residences or dwellings. Included in this industry are: 
(1)  Owner-lessors of nonresidential buildings; 
(2)  Establishments renting real estate and then acting as lessors in subleasing it to others; and 
(3)  Establishments providing full service office space, whether on a lease or service contract basis. 
The establishments in this industry may manage the property themselves or have another establishment manage it for them. 
Sign: Any fixture, placard, structure, or device illuminated or nonilluminated that uses any color, form, graphic, symbol, or writing which is visible to the general public, announcing a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, solicitation, or to convey information of any kind. 
Site-built home: See definition of conventional construction. 
"Solar electric power generation: Comprises non-residential establishments primarily engaged in operating solar electric power generation facilities. These facilities use energy from the sun to produce electric energy. The electric energy produced in these establishments is provided to electric power transmission systems or to electric power distribution systems and shall be subject to the following conditions, which may not preclude the imposition of additional conditions: 
(1)  The developer shall be able to graphically demonstrate to the zoning administrator through the use of renderings, photographs or similar credible media that proposed solar collection device or combination of devices shall be designed and located to avoid glare or reflection onto adjacent properties and adjacent roadways and shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. Screening, using fencing and/or vegetative buffers, shall be provided along all sides that do not collect energy to limit the visual impact of the site and to minimize glare issues. 
(2)  The developer of any solar collection device or combination of devices shall provide the following documentation to the zoning administrator, before land development begins: 
a.  Proof of adequate project financing, along with insurance or surety; 
b.  Proof of compliance with regard to interconnection requirements with appropriate public utilities or public utilities regulatory agencies; 
c.  A letter from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources that there are no adverse impacts on historical or cultural resources; 
d.  Submission of a site plan that meets the requirements of the county soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance, and most recent edition of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual; and 
e.  An approved right-of-way encroachment permit from the County Engineer to ensure adequate roadside access and drainage. 
(3)  Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any airport in a manner that would interfere with airport flight patterns. 
(4)  Any solar collection device or combination of devices that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months and for which there are no applications pending for permitted use of the structure at the end of such 12-month period, shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the device(s). The owner of an abandoned solar collection device and the owner of the property where the abandoned solar collection device is located shall be under a duty to remove such device. If such device is not removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed three months, after receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the governing authority may remove such device(s) and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The governing authority may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned device(s) are removed. Delay by the governing authority in taking action shall not in any way waive the governing authority's right to take action. 
Solid waste landfill: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in (1) operating landfills for the disposal of nonhazardous solid waste or (2) the combined activity of collecting and/or hauling nonhazardous waste materials within a local area and operating landfills for the disposal of nonhazardous solid waste. 
(1)  Site must be geotechnically suitable as defined by the county's solid waste management plan. 
(2)  All solid waste disposal facilities shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act of 1990, as amended. 
Stick-built home: See definition of conventional construction. 
Street or road, arterial: Shall mean a street of exceptional continuity that is intended to carry the greater portion of through traffic from one area of the county to another. 
Street or road, collector: Shall mean those streets which are neither local streets nor arterial streets. Their location and design are such that they are of exceptional continuity, serve as routes passing through residential areas, serve as means of moving traffic from local streets and feeding it into arterial streets. 
Street or road, local: Shall mean streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and by nature of their layout serve only vehicles with either origin or destination within the area. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
Structure, nonconforming: A structure which does not comply with the zoning district development standards of that district in which the structure is located. 
Subdivision. The division of a lot of record into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purposes of sale, devise or development, whether immediately or in the future, except that a subdivision does not include either of the following: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are at least equal to the standards of the zoning ordinance; and 
(2)  The division of land where no new street is involved; provided, however, that a division of land that was previously approved as a subdivision with a new street or streets shall not come within this exception. 
Swimming beach: This use comprises areas along streams, rivers, ponds, or lakes for swimming or sunbathing. 
Swimming pool, bath house or cabana (private): An artificially enclosed body of water intended for swimming or water-based recreation. A pool can be built either above or in the ground, and from materials such as metal, plastic or concrete. A bath house or cabana is a permanent freestanding shade structure with traversing curtains, decorative drapes and/or solid walls. 
Technical and trade school: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in offering job or career vocational or technical courses (except cosmetology and barber training, aviation and flight training, and apprenticeship training). The curriculums offered by these schools are highly structured and specialized and lead to job-specific certification. 
Temporary building for storage of materials: Permitted only in conjunction with construction of a building. Allowed either on the same lot where construction is taking place or on adjacent lots. Such a use must be terminated upon completion of construction. 
Tennis court and/or basksetball facility (private): If lighted, lights must be designed so that they do not include upon adjacent lots. Such a court may be surrounded by a fence up to ten feet high. 
Tower: Shall mean a vertical structure on which is or can be located one or more antennas, including but not necessarily limited to guy towers, lattice towers, and monopole towers. Towers can be used for cellular phone service, television transmission or radio transmission purposes. 
Transfer station: A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility or processing operation. Such facility must receive a permit from and comply with the rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for transfer stations. 
(1)  A buffer of 25 feet that meets the requirements of section 407 of the Bulloch County Zoning Ordinance shall be installed around all property lines. 
(2)  Solid waste shall be confined to the interior of transfer stations and not allowed to scatter to the outside. Waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, and floors shall be kept clean and well drained. 
(3)  Sewage solids shall be excluded from transfer stations. 
(4)  Dust, odors and similar conditions resulting from transfer operations shall be controlled at all times. 
(5)  Rodents, insects and other pests shall be controlled. 
(6)  Any contaminated runoff from washwater shall be discharged to a wastewater treatment system and, before final release, shall be treated in a manner approved by EPD. 
(7)  Hazardous waste: no person owning or operating a transfer station shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the handling of regulated quantities of hazardous waste. 
Travel trailer: A vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational uses, not more than eight feet in width and not more than 30 feet in length. 
(1)  Travel trailers are not allowed to be used in any zone for nonrecreational purposes, unless located in a travel trailer park. 
Travel trailer park: A lot on which are parked two or more travel trailers. Travel trailer parks shall meet the same requirements as a manufactured home park. 
Truck stop: This use comprises establishments engaged in retailing automotive fuels (e.g., diesel fuel and gasoline) in combination with convenience store or food mart items. These establishments can either be in a convenience store (i.e., food mart) setting or a gasoline station setting. These establishments may also include overnight parking and provide automotive repair services. 
Use: Any purpose for which a building or tract of land may be designed, arranged, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Use, accessory: A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
Use, nonconforming: A use of land or building, or both, that does not conform to the regulations and standards of the district in which either or both is located. 
Use, principal: The main purpose for which a lot is used. 
Used merchandise (e.g., antique stores): This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in retailing used merchandise, antiques, and secondhand goods (except motor vehicles, such as automobiles, RVs, motorcycles, and boats; motor vehicle parts; tires; and mobile homes). 
Utility substations: 
(1)  Minimum setbacks. Utility substations, including any required fencing, must be set back a minimum of 60 feet from all public rights-of-way and from adjacent property lines of any lot on which a residence is located, and 30 feet from all other adjacent property lines. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. The lot on which a utility substation is located must be of sufficient size to meet the minimum setback requirements; however, in no case shall the lot on which a utility substation is located be less than ¼ acre. 
(3)  Utility substations, including any woven wire fencing, shall be completely enclosed by decorative fencing such as, but not necessarily limited to, brick, stone or wood. Utility substations must also be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing; however, the requirement for woven wire fencing may be waived if the applicant reasonably demonstrates that the utility substation does not pose a hazard to the public. If the requirement for woven wire fencing is waived, then the zoning administrator may waive the requirement for the building to be completely enclosed by decorative fencing if the zoning administrator determines that such waiver would not negatively impact the aesthetic quality of the building. However, all equipment located outside the building, such as but not limited to generators and tanks, shall be enclosed by decorative fencing. 
(4)  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
(5)  A buffer a minimum of 25 feet wide must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. If any decorative fencing requirements are waived, the zoning administrator may require additional landscaping to preserve the aesthetic quality of the site. 
(6)  Any building at a utility substation site must be architecturally compatible with adjacent properties. 
(7)  The applicant must submit a site plan to the zoning administrator, showing the proposed location and design of any buildings, the proposed location and type of any exterior equipment, the proposed location and design of all fencing, any proposed landscaping, the means of ingress and egress, the uses of adjacent property, and the distance of all improvements from adjacent property lines and rights-of-way. The site plan must be approved by the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a permit, and the zoning administrator may require any modifications to the site plan necessary to achieve compliance with the standards and spirit of this section. 
(8)  The development standards in each district shall not apply to utility substations. 
Variance: An authorization granted by the planning and zoning commission for construction or maintenance of a building or structure which is otherwise prohibited by this section, when such authorization will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this section would result in unnecessary or undue hardship; provided, however, that with the exception of a medical hardship variance, no variance will be granted which shall authorize a land use not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
Veterinary service: This use comprises establishments of licensed veterinary practitioners primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals; and establishments primarily engaged in providing testing services for licensed veterinary practitioners. 
Warehousing and storage: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in operating merchandise warehousing and storage facilities. These establishments generally handle goods in containers, such as boxes, barrels, and/or drums, using equipment, such as forklifts, pallets, and racks. They are not specialized in handling bulk products of any particular type, size, or quantity of goods or products. 
Wastewater pretreatment facility: A facility which collects sludge from septic tanks and restaurant grease traps and uses a process to separate the solids from the liquids. 
(1)  The facility shall either be connected to a municipal wastewater treatment system for final treatment of wastewater created from the de-watering process, or the wastewater created from the de-watering process shall be discharged into a remote lift station of a municipal wastewater treatment system which is approved by the municipality. The facility shall be subject to the rules of the accepting municipality. 
(2)  All collected solid waste must be deposited only in an EPD permitted solid waste handling facility authorized to receive the applicable waste types. 
(3)  Wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be paved and enclosed. 
(4)  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation shall be covered, substantially leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. 
(5)  Solid waste collection and transportation vehicles shall be cleaned frequently and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(6)  Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not leak or spill therefrom. 
(7)  All wastewater from cleaning of vehicles must be handled in a manner which meets all applicable environmental laws and regulations. 
(8)  The facility shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  The facility shall receive all permits required by the State of Georgia. 
(10)  No business that pumps or hauls waste from grease traps or septic tanks whose primary place of business is located outside of Bulloch County would be allowed to utilize this facility or transfer waste to a truck owned by a business in Bulloch County. 
(11)  Development standards: 
a.  Minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
b.  No facility shall be within 1,000 feet of a residential dwelling. 
c.  No facility shall be within 100 feet of a floodplain or wetland. 
d.  No facility shall be within 300 feet of an individual or public water supply source or well. 
e.  No facility shall be within 300 feet of any water impoundment, lake, stream, pond or any permanent or intermittent waterbody considered waters of the state. 
f.  No facility shall be located in an unconfined aquifer which is used or may be used as a principal source of potable water. 
g.  Odor control methods must be used. 
h.  A 25-foot landscaped buffer consisting of trees capable of growing to a height of no less than 40 feet shall be installed and maintained along the side and rear property lines. If the facility is visible from the road accessing the property, either the aforementioned standard of landscaping or opaque fencing of no less than six, but not greater than eight feet in height shall be installed within the front setback. 
i.  Access to the property shall be on a paved public road with all driveway aprons being paved to the edge of the right-of-way. 
j.  All interior parking and circulation within the facility shall consist at a minimum of a gravel or similarly compacted pervious or impervious surface to minimize on-site erosion and runoff. 
k.  All on-site and off-site drainage shall be installed so as to minimize the potential for any pollution runoff and shall be compliant with NPDES requirements. 
Wholesale operation: A business engaged in the sale of goods in large quantities for resale purposes. 
Wholesale trade agent and broker (auctions): This use comprises wholesale trade agents and brokers acting on behalf of buyers or sellers in the wholesale distribution of goods. Agents and brokers do not take title to the goods being sold but rather receive a commission or fee for their service. Agents and brokers for all durable and nondurable goods are included in this industry. 
Wildlife refuge: This use comprises establishments engaged in the preservation of natural areas or settings and/or establishments engaged in operating commercial hunting or fishing preserves (e.g., game farms). 
Wood kitchen cabinet and countertop manufacturing: This use comprises establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing wood or plastics laminated on wood kitchen cabinets, bathroom vanities, and countertops (except freestanding). The cabinets and counters may be made on a stock or custom basis. 
Yard: A required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted in this section. A yard may also be known as a setback. 
Yard, front: The open space on a lot located between the right-of-way boundary of the abutting street and the front building line as extended to the lot lines to either side. Any yard lying between an abutting street and the building line is considered a front yard. For example, in the case of a corner lot which is abutted on two sides by streets, both yards abutting the streets would be front yards; setbacks and other development standards for front yards would apply to both of these yards. 
Yard, rear: The open space located between the rear property line and the rear building line as extended to the side lot lines. 
Yard sale: Sales of used household belongings by an individual at his/her principal residence or by a group of individuals combining such items for a group yard sale at one of their principal residences or the property of a nonprofit entity. Such sales may be held no more than four times in a calendar year, with each individual sale lasting no more than three consecutive days. All merchandise must be the property of the person(s) holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. The term also includes garage sales, basement sales, or other similar usage. 
Yard, side: The open space located between the side property line and the side building line as extended to the front and rear lot lines. 
(Amd. of 11-5-02; Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 10-4-05(1); Amd. of 11-1-05; Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. of 12-2-08; Amd. of 5-17-13(1); Amd. of 5-17-13(2); Amd. of 4-7-15; Amd. of 6-7-16; Amd. of 11-7-17) 
Section 203. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted December 2, 2008, deleted and reserved section 203, which pertained to housing definitions and derived from Amd. of 12-2-03; Amd. of 4-6-04; Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 9-6-05(1); Amd. of 9-6-05(2); and Amd. of 10-3-06. 
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Section 301. - Districts established. 
(a)  Districts: For the purposes of this appendix, the county is divided into districts as follows: 

 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 302. - Districts explained. 
(a)  Districts are areas of land within the county to which different development requirements and standards are applied. These differences are intended to promote the separation of incompatible uses, encourage sound land use patterns, and retain the character of the community. Although this appendix established the locations of districts as indicated on the official zoning map, a district may be changed in the future in accordance with the provisions of Section 414. 
(b)  In making the decision to change a district, the points contained in Section 414 must be considered by the planning and zoning commission as well as the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Zoning to apply when lot is divided by district boundary line. In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of the original passage of this ordinance (November 4, 1994), each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this appendix for the district in which each such parcel is located. However, if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may apply for an amendment to extend a use allowed in one district into the other provided that the other district is a like kind use district and that such extension is in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is extending. Such extensions may only be considered upon review by the board of commissioners through the amendment process. Fee may be waived in such instances. 
(d)  Any parcel of land that is recorded as one parcel and is split by a road without a deeded right-of-way (public or private) for subdividing purposes shall be considered as one parcel. Any parcel of land that is recorded as one parcel of land and is split by a public road with a right-of-way deeded to and accepted by a governmental entity shall be considered as two parcels for subdividing purposes. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROCEDURES 

Section 401. - Initial information. 
(a)  Article 4 outlines the procedures to be followed in order to comply with the requirements of this appendix. Initial information about the ordinance may be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(b)  The zoning administrator will provide and maintain copies of the ordinance for review and/or sale. 
Section 402. - Compliance with zoning ordinance required. 
No building shall be erected, used, occupied, moved or altered nor shall any use be allowed that does not conform to the requirements specified for the district in which such building or use is located, except that all buildings or uses not in conformity with the district requirements which lawfully existed at a particular location at the time this ordinance was originally adopted (November 4, 1994) may be continued but only as provided in Section 403, "Continuance of nonconforming uses or structures." 
Section 403. - Continuance of nonconforming uses or structures. 
A lawful use of or vested right to use any building, structure or land existing at the time of the original adoption of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) or the adoption of any amendment thereto may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this appendix even though such use does not conform with the regulations of this appendix except that: 
(1)  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use or structure. 
(2)  A nonconforming residential or agricultural structure, provided the use therein is a permitted use, may be enlarged, provided it is an improvement, subject to building codes and regulations, to come into conformity with the zoning district development standards, after the date of original adoption of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) or the adoption of any amendments thereto. 
(3)  A nonconforming use shall not be reestablished after discontinuance for six months regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon. 
(4)  Any intended nonconforming use for which a vested right was acquired prior to the original adoption of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) or the adoption of an amendment thereto shall be prohibited unless such is actually commenced within one year of the original adoption of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) or the adoption of an amendment thereto regardless of the intent or expectation to commence or abandon such nonconforming use. 
(5)  A nonconforming structure shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired except as provided herein: 
a.  If the structure is altered or repaired, such alterations or repairs shall be an improvement and in conformity with the building codes and development standards (except for minimum lot area) in force at the time of such alteration or repair. 
b.  If the structure is totally rebuilt, the replacement structure shall conform with all the requirements and development standards (except minimum lot area) of this ordinance, except as to the uses permitted in the particular district. 
Section 404. - Height of fences and walls in a residential zoning district. 
No fence or freestanding wall, other than a retaining wall, in a required setback area for a residential zoning district shall be more than six feet in height above finished grade, except as required for screening. (See Section 407). 
Section 405. - Required buffers in commercial and industrial districts. 
In any commercial or industrial zoning district where a lot abuts any residential district or any adjacent residential use, a 25-foot wide buffer shall be provided with screening as specified in Section 407. Offstreet parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
Section 406. - Screening of service areas within 100 feet of public street. 
Any service area, loading area, refuse, or storage area between a principal building and a public street being visible from such street and lying within 100 feet of such street shall be provided with screening as specified in Section 407. 
Section 407. - Screening required. 
Whenever screening is required by this appendix, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such fences and/or walls shall be at least six feet in height, but no greater than eight feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot lines of the adjoining properties. When hedges or natural plantings are used (together with the fence prescribed) to form the required screening, the minimum sufficient opacity shall be deemed to require no less than three feet of plantings and/or hedge in the area immediately adjacent to the fence, measured along the ground surface from the fence to the inside border of such plantings and/or hedge plantings. Hedges of comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than two years from the time of planting. The building official shall make determination of the degree of satisfactory completion of required screening according to a common standard; the building official's decisions in each instance may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. 
Section 407A. - Minimum yard setback. 
Wherever this appendix requires a minimum setback between a property line and a building line, unless otherwise indicated, this shall mean the required minimum distance between any point on the property line to the nearest point on the corresponding building line, i.e., the minimum front building line shall be at least the required minimum distance from the front property line, the rear building line shall be at least the required minimum distance from the rear property line, etc. 
Section 408. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005 repealed sections 408, 409 in its entirety. Former section 408 pertained to a building permit requirement and certificates of occupancy, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997. 
Section 409. - Appealing an action of the zoning administrator, building official, or planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  If the zoning administrator or building official executes an action which the aggrieved party believes to be contrary to this section, that action may be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action by the zoning administrator or building official was taken. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission has jurisdiction for hearing appeals concerning actions of the zoning administrator or building official related to this section. Applications for appeal may be obtained from and submitted to the zoning administrator, who will transmit them to the planning and zoning commission for its consideration. 
(c)  When an action of the zoning administrator or building official is appealed, all construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action must be stopped immediately. In certain cases, however, the building official may feel that the stopping of such construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action will cause imminent peril to life or property. Then, the building official may certify to the planning and zoning commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the halting of construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, the construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action is allowed to continue unless the construction is halted by the planning and zoning commission or a restraining order is granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  When an application for appeal of an action of the zoning administrator or building official is received, the planning and zoning commission will set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the parties to the appeal will be notified of the date of the hearing by the planning and zoning commission by certified mail with return receipt requested. Any person may appear at the hearing, or have a representative attend instead. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission will make a decision concerning the appeal and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the planning and zoning commission (including but not limited to decisions on appeals or variances) may appeal such decision to the county board of commissioners. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the zoning administrator within 30 days of the date of the decision being appealed. When an application for appeal of a decision of the planning and zoning commission is received, the board of commissioners will set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the parties to the appeal will be notified of the date of the hearing by the board of commissioners by certified mail with return receipt requested. Any person may appear at the hearing, or have a representative attend instead. 
(f)  An application for appeal of an action of the zoning administrator or building official may be withdrawn by the applicant as a matter of right until 5:00 p.m. the day prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners at which such application is scheduled to be heard. Such withdrawal must be in writing and must be received by the zoning administrator by 5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled meeting. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 410. - Procedures: variances, conditional use and amendments. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. 
(1)  Preapplication conference: Recommended. Any applicant seeking approval for a proposed zoning action is advised to engage in a preapplication conference. Prior to filing an application, an applicant may meet with the zoning administrator and the county staff development review committee and discuss their intentions with regard to a given application and questions regarding the procedures or substantive requirements of this section. The applicant should bring sufficient information including sketch maps of the site, a description of the existing environmental, topographical and structural features on the site, the proposed project or use, graphics that illustrate the scale, location and design of any buildings or structures to the extent known, and a list of the issues to be discussed at the conference. No matters discussed at said meeting shall be binding on either the applicant or the county. 
(2)  Preapplication conference: Mandatory. Any applicant seeking approval for a proposed zoning action involving: 
a.  A residential use of more than 50 dwelling units; 
b.  A nonresidential use that would generate an additional 500 or more vehicle trips per day as defined by the Institute of Traffic Engineers Trip Generation Manual; 
c.  A planned unit development; or 
d.  A development of regional impact, is required to engage in a preapplication conference with the zoning administrator and the county staff development review committee at its regularly scheduled monthly meeting or such other meeting as the zoning administrator may determine. 
The zoning administrator may waive the preapplication conference requirement in cases where it is clear such a waiver is not detrimental to the applicant or the county. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  The developer or owner submitting a request for a variance, conditional use, or an amendment to the official map or text of the zoning ordinance (hereinafter in this section collectively referred to as a "zoning request") must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing, under the owner's signature. The planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners may also propose a zoning request. 
(2)  Application for a zoning request may be made with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator will take the required information and transmit it to the planning and zoning commission for its consideration. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on all variances and shall make the final decision on all variances, unless such decision is appealed to the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of section 409. The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on all conditional uses and amendments and shall make the final decision on all conditional uses and amendments, after receiving a recommendation on the conditional use or amendment from the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission may at its option hold a public hearing on a conditional use or amendment prior to making its recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(3)  No application is to be accepted from any person in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances. If an applicant for a zoning request or any other action by the planning and zoning commission is, at the time of such application, determined by the zoning administrator to be in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, then the zoning administrator will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant voluntarily removes or changes the cause of the violation and ceases to be in violation. The applicant must notify the zoning administrator that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the zoning administrator as to the violation. When the applicant has ceased to be in violation of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, the zoning administrator will then accept the application for a zoning request. A receipt showing that all county ad valorem taxes on the subject property have been paid and that no delinquencies exist must be submitted with all applications for zoning requests. The zoning administrator may waive the requirements of this paragraph when the zoning administrator, in his discretion, determines that the enforcement of these requirements would cause an extraordinary and undue hardship on the applicant, and that the waiver of these requirements will not have a significant negative impact on the safety, benefit or welfare of the public. 
(c)  Notification. 
(1)  Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing. Such notice will state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the zoning request is for an amendment to rezone property from one district to another and is initiated by a party other than the board of commissioners, then the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning district of the property, and the proposed zoning district of the property. 
(2)  If the zoning request is for a particular parcel or parcels of property and is initiated by a party other than the board of commissioners, the zoning administrator shall post a sign in a conspicuous place on the property at least 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. The sign should set forth the purpose, date, time, and place of the scheduled public hearing, and the present and proposed zoning districts in case of a rezone. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation respecting a requested conditional use or amendment to the board of commissioners within 60 days of the filing of the application. If the planning and zoning commission fails to send its recommendation to the board of commissioners within the aforesaid 60 days, it shall mean that the planning and zoning commission recommends approval of the conditional use or amendment. Provided, however, that the planning and zoning commission may defer making its recommendation on a conditional use or amendment for more than sixty (60) days with the consent of applicant. After receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed conditional use or amendment. 
(d)  General guidelines. 
(1)  Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at their own expense. 
(2)  Zoning requests shall, as a general rule, be called in the order in which they are received by the county, provided that nothing shall prevent the commission or board from changing the order of decisions reviewed at the time of the hearing for the convenience of the commission or board and the public. 
(3)  The chairperson will read or cause to be read a summary of the proposed zoning request under consideration prior to receiving public input. 
(4)  As a general rule, the chairperson shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning request in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except for the applicant, who will always speak first, or if the board of commissioners has brought a zoning request to the hearing, then the commissioners shall speak first. 
(5)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the commission or board from taking reasonable steps necessary to insure that hearings are conducted in a decorous manner, to assure that the public hearing on each zoning request is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(6)  The planning and zoning commission and board of commissioners will make a decision concerning the zoning request and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. 
(e)  Public comments. 
(1)  Written comments on the subject of the hearing may be submitted by any citizen or property owner at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
(2)  All persons who wish to address the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners at a hearing concerning a zoning request shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the county prior to the commencement of the hearing. Only those persons signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners, in his discretion, decides to make an exception at the time of the hearing, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(3)  Each side will be allowed a minimum time period of ten minutes to make its presentation. The length of time of oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be determined by the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners, and will depend upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak and the complexity of the zoning request under consideration. 
(4)  All questions will be addressed to the chairperson of the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners. 
(5)  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning request under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the members of the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners. 
(6)  Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or from discussing facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning request under consideration. 
(7)  The chairperson of the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(8)  Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself or herself and state his or her current address, and if an attorney or other designated agent, identify his or her principal. 
(9)  The merits of the zoning request shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, evidence or opinions regarding devaluation, fair market value, nuisance, environmental concerns, traffic, noise, aesthetics and in general, the health, welfare and benefit of the community or county as it is affected by the zoning request. The speaker shall refrain from comment on unrelated zoning issues and unrelated tracts of land. 
(f)  Decisions. 
(1)  The board of commissioners is not bound by the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The board of commissioners may grant or deny the application for a zoning request and, if granted, establish such additional conditions and development standards as it deems appropriate to satisfy the standards in article 4. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission may impose conditions on variances and recommend conditions on conditional uses and amendments as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of the workers and residents and to protect the surrounding landowners and neighborhoods. 
(3)  After reviewing the record of the public hearing and considering recommendations from the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners may approve or deny the requested amendment, reduce the land area for which the amendment is requested, change the district or land use category requested, or impose conditions which may restrict the use or development of the property in a manner not otherwise required by this section. Any such conditions imposed by the board of commissioners shall be incorporated into this section and shall become a part of the official zoning map, whether or not actually entered upon the official zoning map. 
(4)  The power to approve a variance rests with the planning and zoning commission, except that in consideration of a rezoning of property from one zoning district to another or a conditional use the board of commissioners may approve a variance in connection with its approval of a conditional rezoning or conditional use. 
(5)  The power to approve a conditional use and enact an amendment rests with the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Deferrals. 
(1)  Prior to the close of the hearing, the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners shall announce whether it will vote on the zoning request at that same hearing or whether it will defer its vote for a period not to exceed 45 days. Provided, however, that the planning and zoning commission or board of commissioners may defer its vote on a zoning request for more than 45 days with the consent of the applicant. 
(h)  Withdrawals. 
(1)  An application for a zoning request or the appeal of the denial of a zoning request may be withdrawn by the applicant as a matter of right until 5:00 p.m. the day prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission or the board of commissioners at which such application is scheduled to be heard. Such withdrawal must be in writing and must be received by the zoning administrator by 5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled meeting. 
(i)  Reapplication. 
(1)  If an application for a zoning request is denied, an application for a zoning request that is substantially the same may not be filed with the zoning administrator until at least six months following the denial. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3); Amd. of 8-2-11) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 411. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance is a permit, issued by the planning and zoning commission, which allows construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a way that varies from requirements for the district in which the property is located. A variance may be granted only in an individual case where unnecessary or undue hardship would result if all of the requirements of this section were applied stringently to a particular piece of property. Unnecessary or undue hardship means that owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of any action on the part of the property owner, a permitted use of a lot is not reasonable if all of the requirements of this section are to be met. 
(b)  A hardship may exist for medical reasons which would permit the temporary placement of a manufactured home, meeting applicable development standards, on the same parcel as the original principal dwelling. Such temporary dwelling shall be placed behind and within 300 feet of the principal dwelling whenever possible. Such temporary dwelling shall provide living quarters for an infirmed family member or provide living quarters for a family member or certified/registered assisted living employee to aid in the care of one or more infirmed family members living in the original principal dwelling. Variances approved for medical hardship cases shall be reviewed annually by the zoning administrator. When the medical hardship ceases to exist, the owner of the principal dwelling shall notify the zoning administrator. Such manufactured home shall be removed within 30 days, or subject the owner of the principal dwelling to fines and penalties as outlined in section 418. 
(c)  With the exception of a medical hardship variance, a variance may be granted only for permitted uses in the zoning district in which the property in question is located. (For example, a two-family dwelling would not be allowed to be placed in an R-15 district under a variance). 
(d)  Where a variance is granted for a construction activity requiring a building permit, the building permit must be obtained within 12 months of the issuance of the variance. Otherwise, the variance expires after 12 months. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission will consider the following standards in arriving at a decision on the variance: 
(1)  Will the variance cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes of this section? 
(2)  Is the spirit of this section observed and the public safety and welfare secured? 
(3)  Is the hardship related to conditions peculiar to the property and not a result of any action of the property owner? 
(f)  The zoning administrator shall have the power to grant administrative variances from the development standards of this section where, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street setback: variance not to exceed 20 percent of the setback in the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  Side yard setback: variance not to exceed 20 percent of the setback in the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  Rear yard setback: variance not to exceed 20 percent of the setback in the applicable zoning district. 
(4)  Height of building: variance not to exceed 20 percent of the setback in the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  Extension of variance or conditional use for a construction activity requiring a building permit: variance to grant a maximum of two one-year extensions of the time limits in subsections 411(d) and 413(d) if the variance or conditional use is for a project requiring multiple building permits and at least one of the permits has been obtained and construction has begun under that permit. 
(6)  Parking spaces: variance not to exceed ten percent of required in applicable zoning district. 
(7)  Lot size: variance not to exceed five percent of the lot size in the applicable zoning district (minor subdivisions only - as determined by the subdivision ordinance). 
(8)  Lot width: variance not to exceed ten percent of the lot width in the applicable zoning district (minor subdivisions only - as determined by the subdivision ordinance). 
(9)  Minor amendments to conditions of approval established by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 412. - Developments of regional impact (DRI). 
(a)  Local zoning provision to allow for DRI review: For new developments proposed within the county which meet or exceed the minimum threshold identified in the Department of Community Affair's Procedures and Guidelines for the review of Developments of Regional Impact (DRI), the county will comply with these intergovernmental review procedures. The county shall be allowed up to a maximum of 30 days to complete the review process for large development projects that are likely to create impacts in other local jurisdictions. The county will not take any official action to further any such developments until the DRI review process is completed or a maximum of 30 days has transpired from the date the completed DRI request for review form was forwarded to the regional development center. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 413. - Conditional use. 
(a)  Some zoning districts permit certain uses only upon approval of the board of commissioners after receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. These uses are identified in this section as conditional uses and such uses are allowed only under the circumstances specified in this section. 
(b)  An applicant requesting a conditional use shall provide the zoning administrator any information as may be deemed appropriate to assist in the consideration of the request (e.g., sketch plan). 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission and board of commissioners will consider the following standards in arriving at a decision on the conditional use: 
(1)  Is the type of street providing access to the use adequate to serve the proposed conditional use? 
(2)  Is access into and out of the property adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
(3)  Are public facilities such as schools, EMS, sheriff and fire protection adequate to serve the conditional use? 
(4)  Are refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor? 
(5)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the conditional use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
(6)  Will the height, size, or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
(7)  Is the proposed conditional use consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance? 
(d)  If the zoning administrator finds that any restrictions upon which a conditional use was granted are not being complied with, he/she may suspend the permit for the conditional use until such time as the applicant brings the conditional use into compliance with the restrictions imposed by the board of commissioners. Only work upon the conditional use may be allowed during suspension of the permit which is necessary to bring the conditional use into compliance with the restrictions imposed by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Where a conditional use is granted for a construction activity requiring a building permit, the building permit must be obtained within 12 months of the issuance of the conditional use. Otherwise, the conditional use expires after 12 months. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 414. - Amendments. 
(a)  Any land owner may request that the official map be amended from the existing zoning district to another as it applies to the owner's property. Also, any person affected by this zoning ordinance may propose an amendment to the text of this zoning ordinance under the provisions of this section. As used in this section, the term "amendment" shall mean both a change to the official map and a change to the text of this section unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  An applicant requesting an amendment to the official map shall provide the zoning administrator the following: 
(1)  Details of the specific proposed use(s) of the property, including but not limited to a sketch plan prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer showing details of the specific proposed uses. Applications for speculative zoning without specific uses will not be accepted. 
(2)  A copy of the recorded plat and legal description will be the minimum requirement for the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Where the zoning administrator or the county staff development review committee has recommended the preparation of special studies pursuant to a preapplication conference or where the applicant elects to submit additional technical reports in support of the proposed development, such reports shall be submitted with the initial application form. 
(4)  During review of any application, the planning and zoning commission may determine that additional specific technical information is needed regarding any potential environmental, fiscal, or public service impacts. If such a determination is made, the planning and zoning commission shall have the discretion to defer its recommendations concerning such an application upon preparation of a special study intended to analyze the potential impacts or any specific areas of concern. 
(5)  Where preparation of a special study has been required, no application shall be recommended to be submitted to the board of commissioners for a public hearing until such study has been received and reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. The cost of any special study shall be borne by the applicant, unless the board of commissioners approves the participation of public funds, as necessary, or being in the public interest. 
(6)  Any other materials or information as may be deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  When considering a proposal to amend the official map, the following standards shall be considered: 
Standards: 
(1)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(2)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(3)  Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(4)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, EMS, sheriff or fire protection? 
(5)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(6)  Will the use be consistent with the purpose and intent of the proposed zoning district? 
(7)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan? 
(8)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
(d)  When considering a proposal to amend the text of the zoning ordinance, the following standards shall be considered. 
Standards: 
(1)  Is the proposed text amendment compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(2)  Is the proposed text amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance? 
(3)  Will adoption of the amendment further the protection of the public health and safety or general welfare? 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 409—414, and have been treated as superseding the former §§ 410—414, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted April 3, 2001; an ordinance adopted May 1, 2001; an amendment adopted June 4, 2002(1); an amendment adopted Nov. 5, 2002; an amendment adopted Aug. 3, 2004; and an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 415. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the board of commissioners to serve for staggered three year terms. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removed for cause by the board of commissioners based on written charges and after a public hearing. The amount of compensation to planning and zoning commission members shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until the chairperson is reelected or a successor is elected. The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules in accordance with this appendix and state law. Meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson and every 30 days or at other times as the planning and zoning commission may determine. The planning and zoning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed, upon official approval, in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be a public record. All meetings and all records of the planning and zoning commission shall comply with O.C.G.A. chapters 14 and 18, title 50. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission shall require the applicant to furnish such information as it deems necessary when filing an application. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the planning and zoning commission to review and recommend to the board of commissioners its approval, disapproval, or approval with conditions on all requests for rezoning, map and text interpretations and other amendments submitted to the designated officials or initiated by any other individual or governmental unit. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission does not have the power to amend any zoning ordinance, to rezone any land, or to allow any use not permitted by this appendix. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 416. - Appealing an action of the board of commissioners. 
If the board of commissioners takes an action which the developer or other aggrieved party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the county superior court. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the board of commissioners was taken. 
Section 417. - Fees. 
Fees shall be set forth in the county schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 5-1-01; Amd. of 8-3-04(2)) 
Section 418. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any amendment to this article, or who fails to perform any act required hereunder or commits any prohibited act, upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances. Each and every day for which any violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Amd. of 1-2-07) 
Section 419. - Remedies. 
If any building or land is used or maintained in violation of this appendix, anyone, including the county, who would be harmed by such a violation may initiate legal proceedings to obtain an injunction or other appropriate remedy to stop the violation or to prevent any act which would constitute such a violation. Other legal remedies are also available as provided by Georgia law. 
ARTICLE 5. - AG-5 AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL 

Section 500. - Statement of purpose. 
The agricultural districts are established as districts in which the principal use of land is for farming, dairying, forestry operations and other agricultural activities. For the agricultural districts, in promoting the general purposes of these regulations, the specific intent of this article is to protect land needed and used for agricultural pursuits from encroachment by untimely and unplanned residential, commercial, or industrial development, and to allow the continuation of existing agricultural pursuits in areas where, in accordance with the recommendations of the comprehensive plan, future agricultural, commercial, industrial, or residential development is anticipated, but where the present application of zoning controls for future more intensive land uses would be unreasonable and premature. 
DEFINITIONS 
Farm: A parcel of land five acres or more on which bona fide agricultural and related uses are conducted as specified in "agriculture." 
Agriculture: The production, raising, breeding, or maintenance of plants and animals including, but not limited to: forage and sod crops; grain and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef, cattle, sheep, swine, horses, or goats, game animals, exotic fish, and any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such species; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruit of all kinds, including grapes, nuts, berries; vegetables, nursery; floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or land devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. This does not include the commercial slaughter of poultry, livestock, or other animals. 
(1)  In relation to the treatment of agricultural facilities and operations as nuisances, Georgia law provides in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(a) that "it is the declared policy of the state to conserve, protect, and encourage the development and improvement of its agricultural land and facilities for the production of food and other agricultural products. When nonagricultural land uses extend into agricultural areas, agricultural operations often become the subject of nuisance actions. As a result, agricultural facilities are sometimes forced to cease operations. Many others are discouraged from making investments in farm improvements or adopting new technology or methods. It is the purpose of this code section to reduce losses of the state's agricultural resources by limiting the circumstances under which agricultural facilities and operations may be deemed to be a nuisance." 
(2)  The Code further states in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(c) that "no agricultural facility or any agricultural operation at an agricultural facility shall be or shall become a nuisance, either public or private, as a result of changed conditions in or around the locality of such agricultural facility if the agricultural facility has been in operation for one year or more. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when a nuisance results from the negligent, improper, or illegal operation of any agricultural facility." 
(3)  The Code further states in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7(d) that "for the purposes of this code section, the established date of operation is the date on which an agricultural operation commenced operation. If the physical facilities of the agricultural operation are subsequently expanded or new technology adopted, the established date of operation for each change is not a separately and independently established date of operation and the commencement of the expanded operation does not divest the agricultural operation of a previously established date of operation." 
(Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 501. - Purpose. 
AG-5 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve low-to-medium density areas where agriculture is the primary land use. Residences, which may or may not be incidental to these activities, are also permitted. These districts are free from other uses which are incompatible with low-to-medium density agricultural and residential uses. 
Section 502. - Boundaries of AG-5 districts. 
The official map (Section 2301 of this appendix) shows the boundaries of all AG-5 districts within the county. Article 23 also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
Section 503. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in AG-5 districts: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family detached. 
(2)  Industrialized building. 
(3)  Church. 
(4)  Farm. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable market. 
(6)  Nursery, garden center, and farm supply store. 
(7)  Kennel (commercial). 
(8)  Cemetery. 
(9)  School. 
(10)  Government: local, state or federal. 
(11)  Utility substations. 
(12)  Manufactured home. 
(13)  Recreational facility (private). 
(14)  Single-family dwellings by farm owner, agricultural or seasonal workers and related to the agricultural operation of the farm on which it is situated and intended for the temporary or seasonal housing of farm workers. These shall be allowed at one manufactured home per five acres. However, no manufactured home shall be placed closer than 200 feet to another manufactured home. The planning and zoning commission shall be granted the power to allow a greater number/density of manufactured homes where it is deemed warranted by unique agricultural needs. Must comply to D.O.L. standards for housing. 
(15)  A landowner may deed to a family member a minimum of one acre from the previously recorded parcel for the construction or placement of a single-family dwelling, provided a minimum of one acre remain in the original parcel of land. This provision shall be allowed one time per eligible family member. For purposes of this provision, the term "family member" means a child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, sibling or stepchild. A single-family dwelling on a lot deeded under this provision shall be required to meet the minimum setback requirements of the R-80 zoning district as set forth in section 606 of this chapter. This provision shall not apply if the lot being deeded to the family member is five acres or greater in area. 
(b)  Conditional uses (AG-5): The following conditional uses shall be permitted in this district upon approval by the board of commissioners pursuant to section 413: 
(1)  Farm supply store. 
(2)  Personal care home: Family personal care home or group personal care home. 
(3)  Recreation facility (commercial). 
(4)  Airport or airstrip (public, private, commercial). 
(5)  Facilities to host private and public functions. 
(6)  Day care facility. 
(7)  Golf course, tennis court and country club. 
(8)  Machine shop. 
(9)  Farm winery. 
(10)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(11)  Civic and social organization. 
(12)  Solid waste landfill. 
(13)  Natural resource development. 
(14)  Manufactured homes, mobile offices, recreational vehicles or camping trailers shall be allowed as temporary occupancy units during the construction of a principal residential use subject to the following requirements: 
a.  There shall be an additional permit required for placement of a temporary occupancy unit with a fee as prescribed in the county's schedule of fees. Subject to any other conditions of expiration herein, a temporary occupancy permit shall be valid for one year. The zoning administrator may grant a one-year extension of the permit if, in the zoning administrator's opinion, the permittee has made a good-faith effort to construct the principal residential use. 
b.  If a valid building permit for a dwelling serving as a principal use on the subject lot, parcel or tract is not maintained, the temporary permit shall become void on the day the building permit lapses. 
c.  No more than one temporary occupancy unit may be occupied per parcel. 
d.  The temporary occupancy unit may be occupied either by the permanent occupants of the principal use under construction, or any work crew employed by the owner-occupant(s) whose purpose is for the construction of the principal use of the subject lot, parcel or tract. At no time shall any temporary occupancy unit be leased or rented for other residential or occupancy purposes. 
e.  The temporary occupancy unit must be removed no later than 30 days after receiving an approved certificate of occupancy for the principal residential structure, unless such unit is for the recreational use of the owner-occupant of the principal structure. 
f.  The temporary occupancy unit shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, setback and height requirements. 
g.  All recreational vehicles and camper trailers shall be built to American National Standards Institute Code (ANSI). 
h.  If the temporary occupancy unit has restroom facilities that are used, the temporary occupancy unit must be attached to an on-site sewage disposal system (septic tank) approved by the county health department. 
i.  Heating systems shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements. Any additional or new solid or liquid fuel-burning appliances to be used in a recreational vehicle or camping trailer shall be installed, used and maintained in accordance with the listing for the appliance and the manufacturer's requirements, including provisions allowing their use in recreational vehicles. 
j.  LP-gas storage and delivery system shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements. In lieu of complying with the manufacturer's requirements, additional storage of LP-gas is permitted provided the storage and delivery systems comply with the current editions of the Uniform Fire, Building and Mechanical Codes. 
k.  The recreational vehicle and camper trailers shall be set up in compliance with the manufacturer's minimum specifications and shall remain mobile. No ancillary structures may be permitted with regard thereto for the temporary occupancies provided for herein. 
l.  The application for the placement and use of a manufactured home or mobile office for the purpose(s) herein may require the applicant to post a bond in the form of government surety, cash or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount not to exceed $3,000.00 per unit to ensure the removal of the temporary occupancy unit within the specified timeframe. 
m.  Upon request of a county code enforcement officer investigating any complaint, satisfactory evidence shall be presented of continuing compliance with the applicable standards for temporary occupancy or the occupancy shall cease. 
(15)  Tower. 
(16)  Solar electric power generation. 
(17)  Boarding house. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in AG-5 districts: 
(1)  Garage or carport, private. 
(2)  ISO intermodal steel container. 
(3)  Children's playhouse. 
(4)  Swimming pool, bath house or cabana (private). 
(5)  Tennis court and/or basketball facilities (private). 
(6)  Garden (noncommercial). 
(7)  Deck, patio, barbecue grill, or other such facility. 
(8)  Fence, wall, exterior lighting fixture, or other general landscaping and site development facility. 
(9)  Antenna (noncommercial). 
(10)  Temporary building for storage of materials. 
(11)  Roadside stand. 
(12)  Home occupation. 
(d)  Accessory uses are permitted as conditional uses. 
(1)  Cottage industry (if located outside residential development areas as illustrated in the Bulloch County Future Land Use Map). 
(e)  All uses not permitted within AG-5 district by this section are specifically prohibited, except as may be allowed by other provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1997-40, 12-2-97; Amd. of 11-7-00(2); Amd. of 7-2-02(1); Amd. of 7-2-02(2); Amd. of 1-7-03; Amd. of 6-1-04; Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. of 8-1-06(2); Amd. of 11-7-06; Amd. of 3-6-07; Amd. of 10-9-07; Amd. of 12-2-08; Amd. of 5-17-13(1); Amd. of 5-17-13(2)) 
Section 504. - Development standards for AG-5 districts. 
The following standards are required within AG-5 districts: 

 
(7)  Applicability to land and open space: No building, structure or land may be used or occupied—and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered—unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(8)  Every use must be on a lot: No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this appendix. 
(9)  Only one principal building per lot: Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(10)  Open space not to be encroached upon: No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, offstreet parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this appendix. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this appendix must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this appendix. 
(11)  Reduction of yards or lot area: Except as otherwise provided in this appendix, a lot existing at the time of the original passage of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this appendix for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(12)  Lots with multiple frontage: In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(13)  Street frontage: No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than 30 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. For purposes of this provision, the term "frontage" includes the width of an easement from a public street to otherwise land-locked property. 
(14)  Yards and other spaces: No part of a yard, other open space, offstreet parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, offstreet parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this appendix. 
(15)  Substandard lots: When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the original effective date of this section (November 4, 1994), such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this section are met. 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership: When two adjoining lots are in the same ownership, they may be utilized as one lot without being replatted. 
b.  [Reserved.] 
(16)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way: No building, structure, service area, required offstreet parking, or loading/unloading facilities are permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(17)  Physical design standards: Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in applicable development regulations of the county. Consult that document for specific requirements. 
(18)  Offstreet parking and service requirements: Minimum standards for offstreet parking and service requirements are contained in the county standard for offstreet parking and service facilities (Appendix G). 
(19)  Other applicable development regulations: Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained by consulting the zoning administrator. 
(20)  Residential structures and non-residential structures designed or intended for human occupancy shall not be allowed to locate any closer than the height of the tower to any existing tower. See sections 2602 and 2605 of article 26—Standards for towers and wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Amd. of 1-3-06; Amd. of 12-2-08) 
ARTICLE 6. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 6, sections 601—604, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article 6, sections 601—606. Former article 6 pertained to R-80 single-family residential 80,000 square feet, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000(2); Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1). 

Section 601. - Purpose. 
R-80 Single-family residential (minimum lot size—80,000 square feet). R-80 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-density neighborhoods of single-family residences as desired by large number of people. These districts are free from uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
R-40 Single-family residential (minimum lot size—40,000 square feet). R-40 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-density neighborhoods of single-family residences as desired by large number of people. These districts are free from uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
R-25 Single-family residential (minimum lot size—25,000 square feet). R-25 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-density neighborhoods of single-family residences as desired by large number of people. These districts are free from uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
R-15 Single-family residential (minimum lot size—15,000 square feet). R-15 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-density neighborhoods of single-family residences as desired by large number of people. These districts are free from uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
R-2 Two-family residential (minimum lot size—15,000 square feet). R-2 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-to-medium density neighborhoods of single-family and/or two-family residences. These districts are free from other uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
R-3 Multiple-family residential (minimum lot size—15,000 square feet). R-3 zoning districts are intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of land as planned neighborhoods or communities; 
(2)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas; 
(3)  Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets as well as lower development and housing costs; and 
(4)  Provide an environment of stable character which is compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 602. - Residential—Principal uses. 

 
P—Permitted Use. 
C—Conditional Use. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. of 6-6-06; Amd. of 12-2-08; Amd. of 5-7-13(2)) 
Section 603. - Residential—Accessory uses. 

 
P—Permitted Use. 
C—Conditional Use. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 604. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Amd. of April 4, 2006 repealed section 604 in its entirety. Former section 604 pertained to permitted accessory uses and derived from Amd. of April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 605. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Amd. of April 4, 2006 repealed section 605 in its entirety. Former section 605 pertained to accessory uses permitted as conditional uses and derived from Amd. of April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 606. - Development standards. 

 
  
1 Square feet. 
2 Square feet. Lot size as specified by the Bulloch County Health Department, but in no case less than listed. A lot of record lawfully existing at the time of the original passage of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) and having an area which does not conform to the above standards may be developed with a use which is permitted within the district if approved by the county health department. 
3 Minimum side yard setback shall not apply to the common wall separating the individual dwelling units of a two-family dwelling. 
4 Minimum side yard setback shall not apply to the common wall separating the individual dwelling units of a two-family dwelling or a multi-family dwelling. 
5 This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation. For building and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than maximum habitable building height. 
6 Height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation except for satellite, television, and radio antennas, to which this limit does not apply. 
7 No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than the minimum street footage of immediate frontage on at least one public street. For purposes of this provision, the term "frontage" includes the width of an easement to a public street from otherwise land locked property. 
(1)  Conversion of dwellings: The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces. Not applicable in R2 and R3 zoning districts. 
(2)  Applicability to land and buildings: No building, structure or land may be used or occupied—and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered—unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Every use must be on a lot: No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance. 
(4)  Only one principal building per lot: Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. Not applicable in the R3 zoning district. 
(5)  Open space not to be encroached upon: No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in the ordinance. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers (see definition in article 2) are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this ordinance must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(6)  Reduction of yards or lot area: Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, a lot existing at the time of the original passage of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(7)  Yards and other spaces: No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this ordinance. 
(8)  Substandard lots: When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the original effective date of this ordinance (November 4, 1994), such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this ordinance are met. Not applicable in the R3 zoning district. 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership: When two adjoining lots are in the same ownership, they may be utilized as one lot without being replatted. 
(9)  Encroachment on public rights of way: No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(10)  Physical design standards: Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in the county subdivision regulations. 
(11)  Off-street parking and service requirements: Minimum standards for off-street parking and service requirements are contained in the county standard for off-street parking and service facilities (appendix G). 
(12)  Other applicable development regulations: Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained by consulting the zoning administrator. 
(13)  Residential structures and non-residential structures designed or intended for human occupancy shall not be allowed to locate any closer than the height of the tower to any existing tower. See sections 2602 and 2605 of article 26—Standards for towers and wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 1-3-06; Amd. of 4-4-06) 
ARTICLE 7. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 7, sections 701—704, in its entirety. Former article 7 pertained to R-40 single-family residential 40,000 square feet, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000(2); Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1). 

Secs. 701—704. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 8, sections 801—804, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article 8, sections 801—807. Former article 8 pertained to R-25 single-family residential 25,000 square feet, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000(2); Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1). 

Section 801. - Purpose. 
Highway commercial (HC). HC zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve business areas that are motor vehicle oriented, rather then pedestrian oriented. HC districts provide areas that are convenient and attractive for retail activities, business transactions, and services to the public designed primarily to meet the day-to-day shopping and services needs not only of residents of the county, but of surrounding communities as well. Off-street parking and minimum yards are required. Properties in this district must be located on a major arterial, secondary arterial, or collector roadways. 
General commercial (GC). GC zoning districts are intended to provide adequate space for various types of general commercial business uses, including the retailing of major goods and services of larger scale than allowed in NC districts and other types of more intensive commercial activities involving non-industrial use of chemicals, outdoor displays, sales and storage and establishments that rely on highway oriented passerby traffic. 
Neighborhood commercial (NC). NC zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve small business areas of a limited nature that serve primarily the residential neighborhood in which they are located. Development standards for NC districts are designed to promote compatibility with the surrounding residential neighborhood. In order to promote such business development so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive or loud noises, vibrations, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas in locations proposed in the comprehensive plan to the mutual advantage of both consumers and merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations. 
Light industrial (LI). LI zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve physically and aesthetically desirable areas in which clean, low-intensity manufacturing activities may locate and be protected from the intrusion of incompatible land uses. By having such areas available, both new and existing industries may operate and undertake expansion of facilities with the least possible adverse effect on other types of activities which might be incompatible with manufacturing. The elimination of non-manufacturing activities from LI districts benefits manufacturing activities by removing some possible obstacles to their smooth operation and expansion. 
This district is intended for firms that assemble or fabricate manufactured products that are ready for retail sale. Processing of certain types of agricultural products is allowed in this district. Firms that utilize substantial quantities of water in manufacturing are not permitted in this district. 
Heavy industrial (HI). HI zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve physically and aesthetically desirable areas in which clean, higher intensity manufacturing activities may locate and be protected from the intrusion of incompatible land uses. By having such areas available, both new and existing industries may operate and undertake expansion of facilities with the least possible adverse effect on other types of activities which might be incompatible with manufacturing. The elimination of non-manufacturing activities from HI district benefits manufacturing activities by removing some possible obstacles to their smooth operation and expansion. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 802. - Commercial and Industrial—Principal uses. 

 
P—Permitted Use. 
C—Conditional Use. 
1 If in LI zoning district, must be entirely enclosed by a fence that is at least six feet high and screens the yard from view. 
2 A single lot or parcel, less than 25 acres, that is in any commercial or industrial zoning district also may not be subdivided without obtaining a conditional use permit. Subdivision between family members or on property owned by a governmental entity or authority shall be exempt from this requirement to receive a conditional use permit prior to subdividing property. For purposes of this provision, family member has the same meaning as in section 503(a)(15). 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. of 3-6-07; Amd. of 11-6-07(3) ; Amd. of 12-2-08; Amd. of 6-1-10; Amd. of 7-5-11; Amd. of 4-7-15; Amd. of 6-7-16; Amd. of 11-7-17; Amd. of 5-1-18(1); Amd. of 12-4-18(1)) 
Section 803. - Commercial and Industrial—Accessory uses. 

 
P—Permitted Use. 
C—Conditional Use. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 10-4-05; Amd. of 10-4-05(2); Amd. of 11-1-05; Amd. of 4-4-06; Amd. Of 3-6-07; Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 804. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Amd. of April 4, 2006 repealed section 804 in its entirety. Former section 804 pertained to permitted accessory uses and derived from Amd. of April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 805. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Amd. of April 4, 2006 repealed section 805 in its entirety. Former section 805 pertained to accessory uses permitted as conditional uses and derived from Amd. of April 5, 2005(3). 
Section 806. - Development standards. 

 
  
1 Square feet. 
2 Square feet or as specified by the health department. 
3 One foot for every fraction of two feet. 
4 If over 35 feet, a fire control plan must be approved, in writing, by the county public safety director. 
5 No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than the minimum street footage of immediate frontage on at least one public street. For purposes of this provision, the term "frontage" includes the width of an easement to a public street from otherwise land locked property. 
(1)  Applicability to land and buildings: No building, structure or land may be used or occupied—and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered—unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Open space not to be encroached upon: No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in the ordinance. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers (see definition in article 2) are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this ordinance must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(3)  Reduction of yards or lot area: Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, a lot existing at the time of the original passage of this ordinance (November 4, 1994) may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located, unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(4)  Yards and other spaces: No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this ordinance. 
(5)  Substandard lots: When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the original effective date of this ordinance (November 4, 1994), such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
a.  Adjoining lots in the same ownership: When two adjoining lots are in the same ownership, they may be utilized as one lot without being replatted. 
(6)  Encroachment on public rights of way: No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Physical design standards: Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in applicable development regulations of the county. Consult the zoning administrator for specific requirements. 
(8)  Off-street parking and service requirements: Minimum standards for off-street parking and service requirements are contained in the county standard for off-street parking and service facilities (appendix G). 
(9)  Yards abutting railroads: Side yards and rear yards are not required adjacent to railroad right-of-way. 
(10)  Other applicable development regulations: Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(11)  Residential structures and non-residential structures designed or intended for human occupancy shall not be allowed to locate any closer than the height of the tower to any existing tower. See sections 2602 and 2605 of article 26—Standards for towers and wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 1-3-06; Amd. of 4-4-06) 
Section 807. - Industrial performance standards (LI and HI districts only). 
(1)  Automatic screw machine: Permitted only when operated with noise silencers, and when located not less than 300 feet from any zoned residential district. 
(2)  Control of noise: Shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. Noise as measured at the street or property line may not exceed 60 decibels, and must comply with requirements of the County's Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Control of gases, smoke, dust, dirt and fly ash: Such emission shall in no manner be unclean, destructive, unhealthful, hazardous or deleterious to the general welfare. Such emission shall be in strict conformance with all applicable health laws as pertaining to air pollution and smoke abatement. 
(4)  Control of glare and heat: Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed behind solid walls or frosted glass adjacent to the structure concerned. 
(5)  Protective screening: A 25-foot minimum buffer is required where lots in this district abuts any residential district; a minimum of ten percent of the total area of any development shall be devoted to green space. 
(6)  Safety hazards: The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with all governmental rules and regulations. 
(7)  Sewage wastes: Industrial sewage wastes shall comply with all applicable requirements of the governing body and the State of Georgia. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
ARTICLE 9. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 9, sections 901—904, in its entirety. Former article 9 pertained to R-15 single-family residential 15,000 square feet, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000(2); Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1). 

Secs. 901—904. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 10. - MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 10, sections 1001—1004, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article 10, sections 1001—1011. Former article 10 pertained to R-2 two-family residential, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000(2); Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1); Amd. of Dec. 2, 2003. 

Section 1001. - Purpose. 
Encourage the development of land as planned manufactured home communities and to provide efficient networks of utilities to service these communities. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1002. - Boundaries of MHP districts. 
The official map (section 2301 of this ordinance) shows the boundaries of all MHP districts within the county. Article 23 also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1003. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in MHP districts: 
(1)  Manufactured home. 
(2)  Utility substations. 
(3)  Community offices. 
(4)  Laundromat. 
(5)  Maintenance building/shed. 
(6)  Recreation facility (private). 
(b)  The following conditional uses are permitted in MHP districts: 
(1)  Church. 
(2)  School. 
(3)  Day care facility. 
(4)  Home occupation. 
(5)  Golf course, tennis court, and country club. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 1004. - Development standards of MHP districts. 
(a)  All parks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum park size shall be five acres. 
(2)  No manufactured home park shall be occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than authorized in the approved plan submitted pursuant to the requirements of the Bulloch County Manufactured Home Ordinance. No manufactured home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a modification to the original plan has been approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  No manufactured home site permit may be issued unless the park layout has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Each manufactured home shall be provided with utility access. 
(5)  If located in a flood hazard area, the following additional requirements apply for the new communities: 
a.  Manufactured lots must be elevated on compacted fill, or on piers, so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above two feet above base flood elevation or if base flood elevation is not determined it shall be three (3) feet above the adjacent property or crown of the road whichever is higher. 
b.  Surface drainage must be adequate and a hauler must provide for easy access. 
c.  When elevated on piers, lots must be large enough to permit steps: pier foundations must be placed on stable soil no more than ten feet apart and steel reinforcement must be provided for piers more than six feet high. 
d.  Existing manufactured home parks which are located in flood hazard areas must take the following actions: install ground anchors and tie downs as provided by law, notify each purchaser, renter or lessee that the manufactured home is located in a flood hazard area, prepare an evacuation plan to be used in case of flood and file it with disaster preparedness authorities in the public safety division. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1005. - Infrastructure. 
(a)  All parks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Water supply. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided for the manufactured home. The source of water supply shall be through a community water system. The construction drawings shall be prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. Water mains shall provide a minimum flow of water of 500 gallons per minute for four minutes or 250 gallons per minute for two hours at the furthermost point from the tank. Fire hydrants shall be provided at distances not greater than 1,000 feet from the most distant manufactured home. The water main may be located in the right-of-way but may not be located under the pavement. Water lines three-fourths inch in size shall be stubbed out to each lot before the street is surfaced. The water system shall be a permitted community water system as required by the State of Georgia Safe Water Drinking Act. An approved, signed copy from EPD (environmental protection division) of the water system plans must be submitted prior to final approval. A letter of certification is required from a licensed engineer stating the water system has been installed according to the plans and that it meets the fire flow stated above. 
(2)  Refuse. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse for the manufactured home community shall be so conducted as to prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, or insect breeding areas. 
(3)  Sanitary sewage. If a sanitary sewer is installed in a development, sanitary sewers shall be installed to the plans and specifications approved by and in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the county health department. When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed-out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(4)  Sewage disposal systems. Prior to the construction of any community sewage disposal system, such as private septic tanks, an oxidation pond or other facility, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by and be in accordance with the rules and administrative regulations of the board of commissioners and the county health department. 
(5)  Natural gas. Gas lines will not be allowed in a right-of-way. 
(6)  Lot/site drainage. The ground surface shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface or storm water in a safe, efficient manner. 
(7)  Topsoil. Topsoil shall not be removed from lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
(8)  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the developer according to plans and specifications approved by the county engineer. 
(9)  Curb and gutters. If concrete curbs or paved valley type gutters are required, they shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by an engineer, registered surveyor or architect, and approved by the county engineer or the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(10)  Street grading and surfacing. Street grading, base preparation, and surfacing shall be carried out by the developer according to plans and specifications approved by the county and the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(11)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a development. The location and design shall be approved by the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(12)  Entrances. The entrance and exit street(s) shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access between the public street and the community interior street system. At the sketch plan stage, the planning and zoning commission may limit the number of entrances, driveways, or curb cuts. At the preliminary and final plat stages, the zoning official shall coordinate with the county manager, county engineer, and public safety director with respect to entrances, driveways, or curb cuts. Design standards on county or state roads shall be consistent with all state, federal, and local laws and applicable ordinances, including the Georgia Department of Transportation Rules and all amendments or revisions in effect as of the date of the preliminary plat approval. At the sketch plan stage, the planning and zoning commission may consider safety as well as require available alternatives for reducing or increasing the number of entrances, driveways or curb cuts. 
(13)  Identification signs. An identification sign, including the name of the manufactured home park, and the name of the owner/manager or another designated individual who can act for the owner/ manager, measuring not less than ten square feet, and no more than 16 square feet, shall be placed on private property, close to the entrance of the park and readily visible from both directions of the public right-of-way. Signs may be located within the setback area. Signs shall not exceed a combined total of 150 square feet per park. The signs may be illuminated. 
(14)  Fencing. A six-foot high opaque fence shall be erected along all property lines which abut a residential district. 
(15)  Lot Identification . Each manufactured home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel, or iron pipe markers placed at all comers. Lot identification numbers must be clearly visible from the lot to the road accessing it. 
(16)  Recreation area. At least 200 square feet per manufactured home lot shall be developed in one or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
(17)  Sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking spaces, roads, streets and similar areas on private property shall be kept in proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(b)  Street system: 
(1)  In all developments, regardless of size, paving will be required for all streets, including private streets, within the development. All roads inside the development must be paved with either concrete or asphalt approved by the county engineer and zoning official. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of 20 feet totally unobstructed between the center of any two-way roadway and any manufactured home or accessory building. 
(3)  There shall be a minimum of 15 feet totally unobstructed between the center of any one-way roadway and any manufactured home or accessory building. 
(4)  No access roadway shall be located closer than 150 feet to any public street intersection. 
(5)  Parks with less than 100 feet frontage are only allowed one combination ingress and egress road. 
(6)  Roadway intersections within the manufactured home park shall be at least 150 feet apart. 
(7)  All dead-end roadways shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with adequate turn-around room (must be approved by the county engineer). 
(8)  Each site shall be accessible from abutting streets for all essential and emergency uses by vehicular equipment, including equipment used by public protective agencies (i.e., fire, police, ambulance services). 
(9)  Traffic control signs (i.e., stop, yield, and speed limit), shall be placed throughout the community where necessary. 
(10)  Each street shall have a permanent sign installed with a designated name or number identifying each street. (All street names must be approved by E911 prior to naming the streets). 
(11)  Maintenance of streets and parking areas shall be the responsibility of the operator/manager of the manufactured home park; and the same shall be maintained in a condition suitable for emergency vehicle ingress and egress. 
(c)  Paved parking: 
(1)  Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes shall be provided for the use of park occupants and guests. 
(2)  Each lot/site shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of parking to accommodate two automobiles. The 400 feet shall not be considered a portion of the required lot size for manufactured homes. A minimum of two paved parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home. Parking spaces shall be within 30 feet of the manufactured home. All parking spaces within a manufactured home community must also be paved with either concrete or asphalt approved by the county engineer and zoning official. Paved parking is not required for a travel trailer park or campground. 
(3)  Driveways shall have a minimum width of ten feet. 
(4)  All off-street parking areas shall have direct access to an interior street. A direct driveway access shall not be permitted between the manufactured home lot and any exterior street. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1006. - Setbacks. 
(a)  No manufactured home shall be located closer than ten feet to any lot line, except that no manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet to a right-of-way. 
(b)  All manufactured homes and all buildings and structures within a manufactured home park shall have a 40-foot front setback, from any street or highway, based on an approved survey by a licensed surveyor. 
(c)  The minimum distance between any two manufactured homes or between any manufactured home and any other building in the park shall be 20 feet. Manufactured homes shall be at least 12 feet from any common building. 
(d)  Residential structures and non-residential structures designed or intended for human occupancy shall not be allowed to locate any closer than the height of the tower to any existing tower. See sections 2602 and 2605 of Article 26—Standards for towers and wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3); Amd. of 1-3-06) 
Section 1007. - Lot regulations. 
(a)  All manufactured home park lots shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. 
(b)  All manufactured home, travel trailer or campground lots shall front upon a roadway. 
(c)  A manufactured home shall not cover more than 35 percent of the lot on which it stands. 
(d)  There shall be no storage or liquid or gas fuels within a manufactured home park, except as authorized by the local fire department or its authorized representative. 
(e)  No pets shall be sheltered in the crawl space under the manufactured home. 
(f)  Every manufactured home shall be numbered by a means to provide ready visibility from a roadway with three inches in height numbering made of a durable, clearly visible material and shall contrast with the color of the manufactured home. The numbering shall be placed next to the roadway, not more than ten feet away from the road access for the manufactured home park. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1008. - Accessory structures. 
All accessory buildings shall be located in the rear or side yard only. No accessory building shall be located closer than 12 feet from the manufactured home or closer than ten feet from the side or rear lot lines. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1009. - Permit requirements. 
Any manufactured home park owner that allows the placement of a manufactured home without a permit being issued shall be in violation of this ordinance. Such violation can result in a citation being issued to be heard in the Magistrate Court of Bulloch County. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1010. - Owner responsibilities. 
The owner and/or occupant of the property shall maintain all structures and properties in compliance with the requirements in the Manufactured Home Ordinance section 9-33, general safety and aesthetic standards, except as otherwise provided for. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which does not comply with the requirements of these standards. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
Section 1011. - Review process. 
Manufactured home park developments must submit for review, consideration and approval a sketch plan, preliminary plat and final plat as contained in the Bulloch County Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Amd. of 4-5-05(3)) 
ARTICLE 11. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 11, sections 1101—1104, in its entirety. Former article 10 pertained to R-3 multiple-family district, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Ord. of Jan 2, 2001; Amd. of July 2, 2002(1); Amd. of Dec. 2, 2003. 

Secs. 1101—1104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 12. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted Nov. 6, 2007(3), enacted provisions designated as §§ 1201—1213, and have been treated as superseding §§ 1201—1205, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; an amendment adopted April 5, 2005(3); and an amendment adopted Oct. 3, 2006. 

Section 1201. - Purpose. 
A planned unit development (PUD) is a type of land use planning option that is intended to provide a more flexible approach to permitting unified developments on a larger scale and to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements. It is the purpose of the PUD district to encourage the development of compatible land uses within the framework of a master development plan for residential and nonresidential land uses within an environmentally compatible setting. In addition to the natural environment, such developments take into consideration different architectural styles, relative scales of various structures, the network efficiency of streets and utilities, and the larger community setting, and the goals and objectives of the Bulloch County Comprehensive Plan. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1202. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions set forth in article 2 of this appendix shall apply to this article. In addition, for the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings given in this section: 
(1)  Master development plan. A written and graphic submission for a planned development which represents a tract of land, proposed subdivision, the location and bulk of buildings and other structures, density of development, public and private streets, parking facilities, common open space, public facilities and all covenants relating to use thereof. The master development plan is submitted in conjunction with a rezoning application for the PUD district. 
(2)  Open space. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common ownership and use by the residents of the developments and may include complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
(3)  Residential land uses. Any variety of residence types as permitted within respective separately zoned areas of the PUD, and as shown on the approved master development plan. 
(4)  Nonresidential land uses. Those designated areas which are not residential land uses, which includes but is not limited to: commercial or industrial zoned land, common open space, private streets, drives, service and parking areas, recreation and other open space areas. 
(5)  Ownership types. These include all types of residential development including, but not limited to, single-family, duplex, apartments, townhouses, rental, such that ownership may be fee simple, lease purchase, leased or rented, and common ownership of open spaces, recreation facilities, streets and parking areas. 
(6)  Net land area. The area calculated in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential, commercial or industrial use exclusive of streets, rights-of-way, flood hazard areas and public lands. 
(7)  Maximum allowable net density. The total number of dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land based on the net land area. 
(8)  Planned business center. [sic] 
(9)  Preliminary concept plan. A preliminary plan of the proposed planned development, of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of reviewing the proposed land uses and general layout. 
(10)  Comprehensive land use plan. The comprehensive long-range plan containing policies to guide the growth and development of Bulloch County, which includes the analysis, recommendations and proposals for the county's population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use. 
(11)  Professional consultant. The person who is a registered and/or certified engineer, architect or planner who prepared the plan, within the scope of their respective legal responsibilities. 
(12)  Zero lot line. A development concept that allows a setback for: 
a.  A single-family detached dwelling, where the dwelling is situated on a side property line that is common to another parcel; 
b.  A two-family, multifamily or other attached dwelling, where the duplex that is constructed and intended to be divided, thereby creating two zero lot line dwellings. 
For single-family detached dwellings, a copy of proposed deed restrictions, conditions, or covenants, providing a maintenance easement of at least four feet in width, which will allow for the maintenance of exterior dwelling walls facing a zero setback line, and a requirement that dwelling walls facing a zero setback be windowless. Zero side yard lot requirements are not applicable to accessory buildings. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1203. - Boundaries of PUD districts. 
The official map (section 2301 of this chapter) illustrates the boundaries of all PUD districts within the county. Article 23 also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1204. - Types of PUD districts permitted. 
(a)  Planned residential development (PUD-1): This is a planned development concept that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. A mix of residential dwelling unit types is also desirable in this concept to promote a balanced community. Innovative concepts such as zero lot lines, townhouse-condominiums, traditional neighborhoods, villages, cluster-type or conservation subdivisions are encouraged. 
(b)  Planned mixed use development (PUD-2): This is a planned development concept that allows more than one type of use in a building or set of buildings, including some combination of residential and selective nonresidential uses such as commercial, office and institutional uses. 
(c)  Planned business center development (PUD-3): This is a planned development concept for commercial, office, institutional and light industrial centers typically concentrated at or readily accessible to major arterial roads. This concept shall have a building composition with a unified architectural style and is planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size and type of business establishments to the trade area that the unit serves. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1205. - General criteria. 
(a)  A PUD shall be defined as having a minimum area of 20 acres. 
(b)  A PUD is to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity (whether by a single owner or under unified control) containing one or more structures to accommodate residential, commercial and industrial uses, or an appropriate mix thereof, and appurtenant common areas and other uses incidental to the predominant uses. 
(c)  A PUD shall be located on roads with a minimum classification or status of major collector. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1206. - Review criteria. 
(a)  Relationship of the proposed PUD to the Bulloch County Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map. 
(b)  Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access, convenience, safety and design. 
(c)  Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access, convenience, safety and design. 
(d)  Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street parking and loading. 
(e)  Location, arrangement, size and placement of buildings(s), lighting and signs. 
(f)  Arrangement of landscape features and buffer areas. 
(g)  Adequacy of water, wastewater and stormwater management facilities. 
(h)  Adequacy of structures and roadways in areas with moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, ponding or erosion. 
(i)  Preservation of architectural, scenic, historic or natural areas. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1207. - Master development plan approval. 
(a)  The application for approval of a PUD master development plan is treated as an application for an amendment to this article (rezoning), and thus shall follow the procedures contained in sections 414 and 2302 of this article. The applicant shall submit with other materials in an application for zoning map amendment the following exhibits: 
(1)  A statement of objectives that describes the following: 
a.  The general purpose and character of the proposed development including types and uses. 
b.  Tables or calculations illustrating conformance with PUD performance development standards. 
c.  A table of projected building sizes by land use. 
d.  A proposed phasing schedule for each area or development pod. 
e.  A description of water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities to be provided. 
f.  Any special studies recommended or required by the county staff development review committee. 
(2)  A master plan sketch map drawn to approximate scale showing proposed street networks, land uses, open spaces, buffers, lot sizes and building footprints, parking areas (nonresidential only) and phasing areas or development pods. 
(b)  The proposed PUD may depart from strict conformance with the requirements of zoning and subdivision requirements to the extent specified in the master development plan and documents authorizing the PUD so long as tangible benefits are provided to the neighborhood or community in which it is located. These benefits shall be in the form of provisions of exceptional amenities, design excellence, etc. The waiver of any requirement shall be the direct cause of accrual of positive benefits to the residents of the development as well as to the general community (e.g., waiver of yard requirements might result in more usable open space). Departure from any requirement specified in this article or other county ordinances and regulations is a privilege, and shall be granted only upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission and approval by the board of commissioners, as applicable in this article. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1208. - Final development plan approval. 
(a)  If the rezoning approval for the PUD is granted, the applicant shall submit a conceptual site plan for each phase or pod of development, as prescribed in article VIII of the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations, to the planning and zoning commission. The applicant shall also submit with other materials in an application for final development plan approval the following exhibits: 
(1)  An illustration on the conceptual site plan where open space, landscaping and buffers will be located. 
(2)  An illustration on the conceptual site plan showing the delineation and layout of proposed residential and nonresidential areas by mix or type including location by land use, building unit types, total number of building units, and total number of lots. 
(3)  An illustration on the conceptual site plan showing the proposed layout and dimensions of lots within each proposed phasing area or development pod. 
(4)  A statement describing the general substance of proposed covenants, grants, easements (except for utility easements) or other restrictions to be imposed on the use of land buildings or structures, including what open space or common interest elements will be dedicated and maintained by a homeowner's association or similar conduit. 
(5)  A statement with tables or calculations illustrating conformance with PUD performance standards and consistency with the approved master development plan. 
(6)  A request for minor modifications from the requirements of the approved PUD master development plan, if any, [for] the applicable phasing area or development pod being requested. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission may approve proposed minor modifications by the applicant to the master development plan during conceptual site plan review provided that such modifications meet any approved zoning conditions or the general intent of development standards of this section or ordinance as a whole. Upon subsequent approval by the planning and zoning commission, subsequent minor changes or deviations from the approved conceptual site plan which do not affect the intent or character of the development shall be reviewed by the planning director. Minor changes may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Change in alignment, location direction, or length of a local street. 
(2)  Adjustments, shifts or transfer, not resulting in increased overall density or land use intensity. 
(3)  Reorientation or slight shifts in building locations. 
(c)  No land disturbing activity permit shall be granted for any portion of a proposed PUD until the final development plan has been approved. No final plat or building permit shall be granted until the appropriate local, state or federal agencies shall approve all proposed lot size reductions for on-site, public, or community sewerage. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1209. - Amendment of a planned unit development. 
Any proposed major and substantial change in the approved master development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, rearrangement of lots, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of arterial or collector streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed by the board of commissioners in the same manner of the initial zoning application. A request for an amendment of the PUD master development plan shall be supported by a written statement and by revised sketch plans or maps. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1210. - Planned unit development time limitations. 
If substantial construction, as determined by the planning director, has not begun within two years after approval of the PUD, the approval of the PUD will expire. The planning director may extend the period for beginning construction, at the request of the owner, for not more than three months after approval of the final development plan. If the PUD expires under this provision, the planning director shall petition the board of commissioners for the PUD district to be removed from the official zoning map and to reinstate the zoning district which was in effect prior to the approval of the PUD. The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the planning director's petition to amend the map in accordance with section 409. It shall not be necessary for the planning and zoning commission to make a recommendation on the planning director's petition to amend the map because of an expiring PUD prior to the board of commissioners making a final decision on said petition. 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1211. - Permitted uses. 
All uses not permitted within PUD districts by this section are specifically prohibited, except as may be allowed by other provisions of this section. 

 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3) ; Amd. of 12-2-08) 
Section 1212. - Development performance standards. 
The following performance standards set forth criteria by which the design, bulk, area and location of buildings shall be evaluated upon that place the responsibility for sound design upon the applicant based on the PUD concept selected. 

 
Formulas for calculating density and land use intensity ratios: 
Floor Area Ratio = Gross Floor Area of a Structure / Lot Size 
Impervious Surface Ratio = Total Area of all Impervious Surfaces / Net Buildable Area 
Net Buildable Area = Total Land Area of Tract - Rights-of-Way, Easements and Open Space 
Net Density Ratio = Proposed Number of Dwelling Units / Net Buildable Area 
Open Space Ratio = Total Amount of Open Space / Net Buildable Area 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
Section 1213. - Bonus incentives. 
The following bonus incentives shall be granted beyond the performance standards if the applicant by provides a single amenity or combination of amenities below. The amount of the bonus incentive shall not exceed 15 percent. 

 
(Amd. of 11-6-07(3)) 
ARTICLE 14. - MHP MANUFACTURED HOME PARK 

Section 1401. - Purpose. 
Encourage the development of land as planned manufactured home communities and to provide efficient networks of utilities to service these communities. 
Section 1402. - Boundaries of MHP districts. 
The official map (Section 2301 of this appendix) shows the boundaries of all MHP districts within the county. Article 23 also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
Section 1403. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in MHP districts: 
(1)  Manufactured homes as defined in housing definitions section. 
(2)  Utility substations meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Minimum setbacks. Utility substations, including any required fencing, must be set back a minimum of 60 feet from all public rights-of-way and from adjacent property lines of any lot on which a residence is located, and 30 feet from all other adjacent property lines. 
b.  Minimum lot size. The lot on which a utility substation is located must be of sufficient size to meet the minimum setback requirements; however, in no case shall the lot on which a utility substation is located be less than one-fourth acre. 
c.  Utility substations, including any woven wire fencing, shall be completely enclosed by decorative fencing such as, but not necessarily limited to, brick, stone or wood. Utility substations must also be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing; however, the requirement for woven wire fencing may be waived if the applicant reasonably demonstrates that the utility substation does not pose a hazard to the public. If the requirement for woven wire fencing is waived, then the zoning administrator may waive the requirement for the building to be completely enclosed by decorative fencing if the zoning administrator determines that such waiver would not negatively impact the aesthetic quality of the building. However, all equipment located outside the building, such as but not limited to generators and tanks, shall be enclosed by decorative fencing. 
d.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
e.  A buffer a minimum of 25 feet wide must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. If any decorative fencing requirements are waived, the zoning administrator may require additional landscaping to preserve the aesthetic quality of the site. 
f.  Any building at a utility substation site must be architecturally compatible with adjacent properties. 
g.  The applicant must submit a site plan to the zoning administrator, showing the proposed location and design of any buildings, the proposed location and type of any exterior equipment, the proposed location and design of all fencing, any proposed landscaping, the means of ingress and egress, the uses of adjacent property, and the distance of all improvements from adjacent property lines and rights-of-way. The site plan must be approved by the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a permit, and the zoning administrator may require any modifications to the site plan necessary to achieve compliance with the standards and spirit of this appendix. 
h.  The development standards contained in Section 1404 of this appendix shall not apply to utility substations. 
(b)  The following conditional uses are permitted in MHP districts: 
(1)  Churches on a minimum of two and one-half acres on an arterial or collector roadway. If the church has a cemetery, the minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
a.  No church building shall be located within 100 yards of any establishment that has been licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
b.  [Reserved.] 
(2)  Schools on minimum of five acres and on an arterial or collector highway. 
(3)  Parks of five acres or more. 
(4)  Day care facility on two or more acres. 
(5)  Home occupation. 
(6)  Golf, tennis, and country clubs. 
(Ord. No. 1997-40, 12-2-97) 
Section 1404. - Development standards of MHP districts. 
(a)  All parks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum park size shall be five acres. 
(2)  No manufactured home shall be located closer than ten feet to any lot line, except that no manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet to a right-of-way. 
(3)  Each manufactured home shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
(4)  The minimum lot size for each manufactured home shall be 6,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 60 feet where lots are served by both public water and public sewer systems. The minimum lot size shall be 6,000 square feet where lots are served by community water system and a septic tank or as required by the county health department. 
(5)  The minimum distance between any two manufactured homes or between any manufactured home and any other building in the park shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  Each individual manufactured home lot shall have a properly drained and all-weather surfaced parking space for at least two motor vehicles. 
(7)  Each manufactured home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel, or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. Lot identification numbers must be clearly visible from the lot to the road accessing it. 
(8)  At least 200 square feet per manufactured home lot shall be developed in one or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
(9)  A six-foot high opaque fence shall be erected along all property lines which abut a residential district. 
(10)  No manufactured home park shall be occupied by a greater number of manufactured homes than authorized in the approved plan submitted pursuant to the requirements of the county mobile home ordinance. No mobile home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a modification to the original plan has been approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(11)  All streets within the park shall be paved to county road standards. 
(12)  No manufactured home site permit may be issued unless the park layout has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(13)  An identification sign, including the name of the manufactured home park, and the name of the owner/manager or another designated individual who can act for the owner/ manager, measuring not less than ten square feet, and no more than 16 square feet, shall be placed on private property, close to the entrance of the park and readily visible from both directions of the public right-of-way. 
(14)  All manufactured home parks or communities of five or more manufactured home lots which are in existence on the date of the original adoption of this appendix (November 4, 1994), shall be required to meet all the conditions set forth in subsections (a)(3), (6), (9), (13) of this section within three years from the date of the original adoption of this appendix. 
(b)  [Reserved.] 
ARTICLE 15. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 15, sections 1501—1504, in its entirety. Former article 15 pertained to HC highway commercial, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-41, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of April 2, 2002; Amd. of June 1, 2004. 

Sections 1501—1504. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 16. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 16, sections 1601—1604, in its entirety. Former article 16 pertained to GC general commercial, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of April 2, 2002; Amd. of June 1, 2004. 

Sections 1601—1604. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 17. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 17, sections 1701—1704, in its entirety. Former article 17 pertained to NC neighborhood commercial, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of Nov. 7, 2000; Ord. of Jan. 2, 2001. 

Sections 1701—1704. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 18. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Amd. of April 5, 2005(3) repealed article 18, sections 1801—1804, in its entirety. Former article 18 pertained to LI light industrial, and derived from Ord. No. 1997-38, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-40, adopted Dec. 2, 1997; Amd. of June 1, 2004. 

Sections 1801—1804. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 19. - IGO, INTERSTATE GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Section 1901. - IGO district boundaries. 
The boundaries of the interstate gateway overlay district correspond to the boundaries of the tax allocation district #1 — I-16/U.S. 301 interstate gateway redevelopment area, as adopted by the board of commissioners and shown on the Official Zoning Map of Bulloch County, and as may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures of this zoning ordinance. The tax allocation district #1 — I-16/U.S. 301 interstate gateway redevelopment area is referred to herein as the "interstate gateway redevelopment area," and the redevelopment plan adopted for the interstate gateway redevelopment area is referred to as the "interstate gateway redevelopment plan." 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1902. - IGO district design standards; intent. 
(a)  The intent of the IGO district is to maintain high quality, long-lasting and sustainable development within the interstate gateway redevelopment area and such other areas as may be designated by the Bulloch County Board of Commissioners from time to time. The standards established by the IGO district are intended to enhance the visual aspect, livability and economic vitality of the areas included within the overlay district; foster common design themes and architectural diversity and interest; and achieve and maintain a consistent, durable and pleasing aesthetic/visual quality. 
(b)  It is further the intent of the IGO district to implement the interstate gateway redevelopment plan through consistency with or as guided by the design standard concepts and the future land use, infrastructure and transportation plans adopted as part of the interstate gateway redevelopment plan, and such plans as may be amended by the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(c)  The IGO district does not change the underlying zoning district of a property, but rather adds provisions that enhance, change or replace certain requirements as specified in this article that otherwise apply to the underlying zoning district. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1903. - IGO district design standards; applicability. 
(a)  Construction activities subject to the IGO design standards. 
(1)  The design standards contained in this article apply to all new nonresidential, multifamily and mixed-use buildings and projects to be issued building or development permits within the IGO overlay district, regardless of the underlying zoning of the property, and to any construction activity that results in the change of the principal use of a building or property. 
(2)  The design standards contained in this article do not apply to additions, renovations or maintenance of buildings or land uses that existed prior to the adoption of the IGO district, provided that such activities do not involve or result in a change of the principal use of the building or property. 
(b)  Uses allowed in the IGO district. All principal and accessory uses allowed by right or by conditional use approval in the underlying zoning district on a property are similarly allowed within the IGO district, except signs that are regulated under section 1907, below. 
(c)  All other standards, requirements and provisions of this zoning ordinance shall apply in accordance with the underlying zoning on a property except as modified, added to or superseded by the provisions of this article 19 for a building or development project within the IGO district. 
(d)  Additional and individual standards may be established through conditional zoning approval for any property within the IGO district by the board of commissioners. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1904. - Development enhancements. 
Development in the underlying zoning districts within an IGO district shall be developed under the following enhanced provisions in lieu of regulations established in other articles and sections of this zoning ordinance: 
(a)  Condominium or multi-family projects. 
(1)  A condominium or multi-family project, where otherwise allowed by the zoning of the property, may be developed at a maximum density of no more than eight dwelling units per acre; except as allowed under the following section 1904(a)(2). 
(2)  A condominium or multi-family project otherwise allowed under the property's zoning may be developed at a maximum density of no more than 12 dwelling units per acre provided that community recreation amenities are provided that meet or exceed the following guidelines: 
a.  A community recreation amenity area or areas must be provided to serve the development. The minimum recreational facilities shall be based on the number of dwelling units served in accordance with table 19.1, which may be met through the provision of one or more amenity areas. 
b.  All amenities must be completed and available for use prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy on more than 50 percent of the dwellings served by the recreational amenity in the development. 
c.  The recreation amenity may be designed to serve the entire development or separate amenity areas may be provided for specific residential development areas. If multiple recreation amenity areas are provided, the total of all amenities shall be no less than the total required by table 19.1 based on the entire development as a whole, distributed proportionally to each development area based on the number of dwelling units each amenity area serves. 
Table 19.1: Recreation Amenities 

 
;adv=6; 1  Children's play area including active play equipment. Multiple play areas are allowed, but none less than ½ acre in size. This area may also be occupied by athletic courts and swimming pools as required herein, and by other recreational amenities. 
2  Any combination of tennis, basketball or volleyball courts. 
3  For instance, 100—149 dwellings = 1 court; 150—249 dwellings = 2 courts; 250—299 dwellings = 3 courts; 300—399 dwellings = 4 courts. 
4  Pools shall meet or exceed ANSI/NSPI-1 standards for class B public pools and maintain compliance with construction and operating permits issued by the health department. 
Note: "sf" stands for "square feet." 
(b)  A hotel, motel or resort hotel located within the IGO district, where otherwise allowed by the zoning of the property, shall meet or exceed the following provisions: 
(1)  Each guest unit must contain a minimum square footage per unit of 300 square feet. 
(2)  At least 15 square feet of gross floor area per guest unit must be provided for one or more of the following: 
a.  A restaurant, deli or other sit-down food service area for breakfast service or dining; 
b.  A health spa operated in accordance with state law (O.C.G.A § 10-1-392 et seq.) staffed with massage therapists that are available on site full-time or by appointment and licensed in accordance with O.C.G.A § 43-24A-a et seq.; 
c.  A retail store such as a convenience, travel accessory, tourist or sports shop; 
d.  A business or concierge center for guests; and/or 
e.  Meeting rooms or convention facilities. 
(3)  Common areas for recreational use by guests collectively containing a minimum of 15 square feet of area per guest unit must be provided. In computing the total square footage provided, swimming pools, fitness or work-out centers and other recreational or leisure facilities available to all guests may be used in determining the square footage; check-in, lobby and waiting areas shall not be included. 
(4)  Management must be on the property 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(5)  Daily maid service must be included in the standard room rate. 
(c)  In the LI and HI zoning districts, the minimum front yard setback may be reduced by the zoning official to no less than 35 feet if the entire area between the building and the adjoining street is landscaped to the standards for frontage landscape strips under section 1911. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1905. - Streets and roads. 
(a)  Public streets and roads within a development must meet the design and construction requirements for all such public roads established by Bulloch County. 
(b)  Private streets and roads may be approved with alternate design and construction standards intended to foster "smart growth" concepts and accepted principles of "new urbanism." Such an alternate design must be approved by the development services staff, and may require curb and gutter to justify reductions from the right-of-way width required for a public street. Alternate designs may include but are not limited to: 

(1)  Roundabouts and traffic circles. 
(2)  On-street parking refuges with landscaped "bulb-outs." 
(3)  Traffic calming strategies such as central landscaped islands, speed tables and undulating lanage created by variations in curb lines. 
(4)  Alternate decorative paving materials at entrances and for pedestrian crossings. 
(c)  While traffic signs and other traffic control devices must conform to the Federal Highway Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, street name signs may be decorative in nature when used throughout a development, subject to approval by the development services staff for readability and ease of identification for emergency vehicles. 
(d)  US 301 corridor access. Any new construction or change in the principal use on a property within the IGO district having frontage on US 301 must comply with the following design standards. 
(1)  Along those portions of US 301 where a highway median is installed or planned: 
a.  Full-service vehicular driveway access directly from US 301 shall be located only at median breaks where left-turning movements are allowed or planned and a left-turning lane in the median is or will be installed. 
b.  Between installed or planned median break locations, vehicular driveway access directly from US 301 shall be limited to right-in/right-out movements and shall be located no closer to any other vehicular driveway access on the same side of the highway than 350 feet (measured centerline-to-centerline of each driveway). 
(2)  Along those portions of US 301 where a highway median is not installed or planned, vehicular driveway access directly from US 301 shall be located no closer to any other vehicular driveway access on the same side of the highway than 350 feet (measured centerline-to-centerline of each driveway). 
(3)  Properties having frontage on US 301 shall provide service road access to all abutting properties in accordance with Section 1906 as a condition of issuance of a building permit or development approval, whether or not such properties have independent access to US 301. 
(4)  All driveway connections to US 301 must be approved by and issued permits by the Georgia Department of Transportation prior to construction. County driveway requirements that are more restrictive than those of the Georgia DOT shall prevail. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1906. - US 301 corridor road and utility access. 
(a)  Intent and purpose of this section. 
(1)  The intent of this section is to: 
a.  Create a continuous service road serving all properties that are adjacent to (or otherwise would obtain their access from) US 301 in order to provide vehicular access for all such properties adjacent to or served by this limited access state highway; 
b.  Provide vehicular access to properties that are to the rear of properties adjacent to US 301 and that have no alternate access from a public street; 
c.  Provide for the placement of utilities serving properties that provide or are provided access to US 301; and 
d.  Provide signage and landscaping enhancements that encourage economic development of the area. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by: 
a.  Providing for equal economic development opportunities for all properties within the US 301 corridor; 
b.  Providing for safe vehicular movements between US 301 and adjacent properties; 
c.  Protecting the operational efficiency and safety of US 301 traffic, in compliance with access restrictions imposed by the Georgia Department of Transportation; 
d.  Providing for uniformity and equal access to public and private utilities serving the area and each property; 
e.  Allowing special signage to be placed on each property abutting US 301 for enhanced visibility of businesses and development from the highway; and 
f.  Providing for the aesthetic quality of the US 301 corridor through the provision of landscaping to a higher standard than that required of other properties in the IGO district. 
(b)  Service road and easements required. 
(1)  For any property that has frontage on US 301, as a condition of issuance of a development or building permit, property owners shall provide a publicly dedicated service road and grant utility easements and frontage landscape strips across their property, as described in this section, to each abutting property that also has frontage on US 301 and to any other abutting property that has no access from a public street. 
(2)  The service road shall permit vehicular access between abutting properties and to driveway connections with US 301 located in accordance with the provisions of this article, planned road improvements contained in the I-16/US 301 Redevelopment Plan, and the standards imposed by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Each required utility easement shall be granted as a permanent, fully-assignable easement to Bulloch County, which may be assigned by Bulloch County for the placement of public and private utilities such as, but not limited to, water, sewer, telephone, cable, natural gas and electrical service. 
(c)  Design and improvement standards. 
(1)  Any service road and its associated utility easements and landscaping strips, as required by section 1906(b)(1), collectively shall be no less than 80 feet in width. 
(2)  The service road shall occupy a publicly dedicated right-of-way of no less than 40 feet in width, and shall be improved with a roadway no less than 28 feet in width (including raised curbs and a 24-foot wide travelway) in order to accommodate two-way vehicular traffic to and from the adjoining properties. The paved travelway and curbs shall be centered within the right-of-way. (See figure 19-1, below.) 
(3)  A service road and utility easements running through a property that has frontage on US 301 to a property located to the rear that has no public street access, shall be located by the county in consultation with the property owners involved. 
(4)  The service road travelway shall be paved and constructed to the public road cross-sectional standards contained in the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations under section 7.1, paragraphs (a) through (j) or as most recently amended. Curbing shall be raised concrete curb and gutters and provided in accordance with section 6.2.5 of the Bulloch County Subdivision Regulations. The roadway shall be provided with a six-foot wide shoulder behind each curb. After the service road has been inspected and accepted by Bulloch County, the owner(s) shall convey fee simple title to the service road right-of-way to Bulloch County. 
(5)  A 20-foot wide frontage landscape strip shall be provided along each side of the service road. See section 1911 for landscaping requirements in frontage landscape strips in general, and specifically section 1911(c)(5) relating to the placement of frontage trees along the US 301 right-of-way. 
(6)  Utility easements shall be granted as follows: 
a.  A 15-foot wide utility easement shall be located within the required 20-foot wide frontage landscape strip between the service road right-of-way and the right-of-way of US 301, parallel and adjacent to the service road right-of-way. (See Figure 19-1, below) 
b.  In all other cases, a 20-foot wide utility easement shall be located within the required 20-foot wide frontage landscape strip parallel and adjacent to the service road right-of-way, extending into the property to be developed. 
(7)  A frontage sign may be placed within the landscape strip adjacent to the US 301 right-of-way in accordance with section 1907(b)(2). 
(8)  Driveways connecting development on a property to the service road shall be no more than 24 feet wide for two-way traffic and shall be no less than 100 feet from any other two-way or one-way driveway (measured centerline-to-centerline). One-way paired driveways shall be no more than 12 feet wide and shall be separated by at least 50 feet (measured centerline-to-centerline). 
(9)  Construction of the service road, extension of utilities and placement of landscaping material shall be done in conjunction with the development or construction approved on the property, and their completion shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such development or construction. 

(d)  Modifications and relief. 
(1)  Prior to its construction, the county manager or their designee shall have the power and authority to determine or modify the location, layout, design or improvement of a service road or utility easement on a property, in order to preserve or enhance the integrity, character or safety of traffic operations; its aesthetic characteristics; or the installation of public or private utilities within or crossing the property. 
(2)  For service roads that terminate at the right-of-way of I-16, improvements shall be modified to provide vehicular access only as needed to serve development on the property and to serve abutting properties that otherwise have no public street access. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1907. - Signage. 
All provisions of article 22 of this zoning ordinance pertaining to signs and sign permit requirements apply to properties within the IGO district, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Interstate signs. In addition to the freestanding signs allowed under article 22, one interstate sign is allowed on each property that, any portion of which, adjoins or lies within 660 feet of the right-of-way of I-16, and is occupied by a commercial, office or industrial use, under the following provisions: 
(1)  Such a sign shall be a minimum of 120 feet and a maximum of 180 feet in height; 
(2)  Such a sign may include a total of 150 square feet of sign area for all signage on the sign structure; 
(3)  Such a sign shall be no closer than 200 feet from any other interstate sign (measured in all directions); and 
(4)  Such a sign shall be no closer to the I-16 right-of-way than 50 feet. 
(b)  Frontage signs along US 301. On any property that has frontage on US 301: 
(1)  Signs that are otherwise allowed under article 22 of this zoning ordinance, including billboards, shall not be located within any utility easement or within a landscape strip that lies between a service road right-of-way and the right-of-way of US 301; and 
(2)  One sign (in addition to the signs that are allowed under article 22) may be located on the property within a landscape strip (but not within a utility easement) that lies between a service road right-of-way and the right-of-way of US 301. Such frontage sign must be a monument sign of no more than 120 square feet in area, must be six feet in height, and its nearest edge must be parallel to and located two feet from the US 301 right-of-way. 
(c)  Interstate signs (allowed under subsection (a), above) and billboards shall not be located within any minimum required front, side or rear yard. 
(Amd. of 9-2-14; Amd. of 12-4-18(1)) 
Section 1908. - Architectural design guidelines. 
(a)  The use of a common palate of building materials for a specific nonresidential or multi-family project shall be maintained for all building façades to create a consistent and themed architectural identity. For large commercial/retail buildings, variations in façade, roofline and depth must be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. 
(b)  Terms used in this section: 
Arcade: A covered walkway or structural canopy extending along the entire length of the front façade of a commercial building. 
Building types: 
(1)  Multi-family residential: A residential building containing three or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Commercial or office: A building occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the sale of goods; the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment or other commercial services; the management of a business enterprise; or the provision of temporary housing to the traveling public (such as a motel). 
(3)  Mixed-use: A building occupied by both commercial stores or offices and residential dwelling units. 
(4)  Industrial: A building occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the fabrication, manufacture or production of durable or non-durable goods. 
(5)  Institutional: A building occupied by a nonprofit religious, recreational or philanthropic organization, club or private school. 
Façade: A vertical exterior face or elevation of a building. 
(1)  Front façade: Any façade with a public entry that faces a public right-of-way. "Facing" a right-of-way shall include being angled 60 degrees or less toward a right-of-way. 
(2)  Rear façade: Any façade without a public entry that does not face a public right-of-way. Such façades may form the "sides" of a building if not facing a right-of-way. 
(3)  Side façade: Any façade without a public entry but facing a public right-of-way or any façade with a public entry but not facing a public right-of-way. A side façade typically connects a front façade with a rear façade. 
Net square footage of wall area: The total area in square feet of a single building façade, less the total area of windows and doors contained within the façade. 
Nonresidential use or development: A property that contains or is intended to contain a commercial, office, industrial or institutional building as its principal use (as defined in this zoning ordinance), or a mixed-use building that exclusively contains commercial, office, industrial or institutional uses on its first or ground floor. 
Obscured from view: The imposition of structural or natural materials between an observer and an object such that the features of the object become visually indistinguishable. 
(c)  Building plans. 
(1)  All building plans submitted as an application for a building permit within the IGO district must clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each façade as described herein. The plans must clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per façade. 
(2)  Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. Grouping of similar buildings is encouraged to minimize the number of reviews required and to allow for originality and design flexibility. 
(d)  General architectural requirements. 
(1)  All ground mounted mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be obscured from view on all sides by an adequately opaque wall, fence or lattice made of materials compatible with the building's materials, or with dense evergreen landscaping. 
(2)  For all commercial or office buildings, roof mounted mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be obscured from view from any public street. 
(3)  Permanent mounted exterior neon lights shall not be allowed. Under-canopy lighting shall be recessed and not directly visible from any public street. 
(4)  In a nonresidential development with out-parcels, buildings located on the out-parcels shall be constructed of the same primary building material as the principal building with which they are associated. 
(5)  Back-lit awnings, roof mounted lights, and/or roof mounted flag poles are not allowed. Satellite dishes shall be located and painted to blend with the background as much as practical. 
(6)  Overhead doors for nonresidential uses are not allowed to face a public street or highway. 
(e)  Building materials. The following building materials may be used and combined to create a consistent, attractive, interesting and long-lasting building design. The quantity and type of building materials are described below. 
(1)  Allowed building materials: 
a.  Brick or brick veneers. 
b.  Stone or stone veneers of natural stone such as, but not limited to, granite, limestone and marble are allowed building materials. Terra cotta and/or cast stone, which simulate natural stone, are also acceptable. Painted stone is not allowed. 
c.  Tilt/architectural pre-cast concrete. 
d.  High grade stucco. Simulated or artificial stucco products are not acceptable. 
e.  Painted concrete block. 
f.  Split-face block/concrete masonry unit (CMU). 
g.  Natural wood and cement-based artificial wood siding. 
h.  Structural glass or glass curtain wall. 
i.  Pre-engineered metal buildings. 
(2)  Ratios and amounts of allowed building materials. 
The following table 19.2 outlines the allowed building materials for specific types of uses that apply to each façade: 
Table 19.2: Allowed Building Materials 

 
1  See the descriptions of building types under section 1908(b). 
2  Rear facades that are visible from a public or private street, or face the front or side of an adjacent building, must meet the standards for a front/side façade. 
3  Any façade of a pre-engineered metal building visible from and within 200 feet of the right-of-way of US 301 may not be exposed metal siding, and must be covered with an alternate building material allowed by this section. 
(3)  Accent/trim exterior building material. Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, etc., may be used to enhance the elevation of the building or for decorative elements but must not exceed ten percent of total wall area per façade. 
(4)  Façade calculations: 
a.  With the exception of accent/trim materials, there shall be no more than two primary building materials used on any one façade. When a material is restricted as a percentage in table 19.2, such as stucco, siding, etc., the building material may not be combined with another restricted building material. The allowed façade materials shall not apply to windows, glass-front windows, entry doors and/or roll-up doors. 
b.  The amount of permitted material shall be calculated using the net square footage of wall area per façade. A building material that is allowed (such as brick) may be used in any percentage throughout the structure. A material that is restricted (such as stucco) is allowed as a maximum percentage. 
For example, a commercial building has a front façade with a gross façade area of 1,200 square feet with 400 square feet consisting of windows and doors. Begin with the net square footage of wall area of 800 square feet (1,200 minus 400) for required building material calculations. In this case, the front façade of a commercial building with a net wall area of 800 square feet shall have no more than 200 square feet of stucco on the front façade (800 × 25% = 200). The balance must be brick or another allowed material without a percentage restriction. 
(f)  Roof requirements. 
(1)  Sloped roofs. Sloped roofs must be covered with shingles, tiles, standing seam metal, or other material with similar appropriate texture and appearance. Tar paper and corrugated metal roofs are not allowed on sloped roofs. 
(2)  Mansard roofs. Mansard roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 2:1 (60º) and a maximum pitch of 90º (vertical), with a minimum four-foot vertical surface rise. The top story of a building may simulate a mansard roof but the minimum and maximum pitches will apply. 
(3)  Canopies. Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have a flat roof with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 
(4)  Arcade for multi-tenant commercial building. For any multi-tenant commercial shopping center or strip retail/service center, a covered arcade shall be provided along the front façade of the building. Arcades are covered walkways connected to or separate from the principal building. They should be designed in a manner that provides architectural depth to the building and includes covered areas for relief from the weather. The arcade must be a minimum of five feet in width. 
(g)  Alternate standards. 
(1)  The architectural design standards of this section 1908 are intended to be followed as outlined above. In the event the intent of these standards can be achieved with minor deviations that do not substantially affect the purpose and intent of this section, the county manager or their designee has the authority to modify the specific provisions on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  If substantial modifications or changes to the architectural design standards of this section 1908 are desired for a particular property or building, the property owner may apply for a variance to modify these standards. Any application for an alternate architectural design standard shall be accompanied with proposed elevations, building material descriptions and renderings necessary for the planning and zoning commission to make a determination whether the alternate proposal meets the intent of these requirements. A variance approval may be granted with conditions, modifications or requirements deemed necessary to maintain the high level of development quality intended by the IGO district. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1909. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Definitions of terms used. 
Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminary. 
Luminary: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture. This term shall be interpreted broadly as applying to all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices (permanently installed or portable), used for illumination or advertisement. 
Luminary, full cut-off: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no direct light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane of the lowest part of the luminary. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This section is intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor light fixtures, eliminate problems of glare, and minimize light trespass, with regulations that avoid unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties or streets. 
(c)  Direction of luminaries. 
(1)  Light must be directed away from residential buildings and motor vehicles on public roadways. 
(2)  Any luminary that is aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminary to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public roadways, shall be redirected or its light output controlled or shielded as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
(d)  Luminaries adjacent to residential districts. For any commercial use adjacent to an area zoned AG-5, R-80, R-40, R-25, R-15, R-2, R-3 or MHP, or residential portions of a PUD, all luminaries, hereafter installed for outdoor lighting shall be full cut-off luminaries, as defined by this section, or another luminary that does not emit any direct light above the horizontal plane of the lowest part of the luminary. 
(e)  Prohibited lighting. The following types of outdoor lighting are prohibited: 
(1)  Searchlights for advertising purposes; 
(2)  Laser source light, or any similar high intensity light, used for any purpose. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1910. - Landscaping. 
The landscaping requirements of the IGO district are in addition to the buffer and screening requirements of article 4 of this zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the landscaping requirements of the IGO district is to improve the aesthetic qualities of the district and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of its neighborhoods and business areas by: 
(1)  Providing for quality and consistency in the design and location of landscaping; 
(2)  Providing for a "signature look" for the area to establish a unique sense of place; and 
(3)  Providing for increased economic development opportunities through an enhanced aesthetic setting attractive to customers and employees alike. 
(b)  Definitions related to landscaping. 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including four-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Deciduous: A plant with foliage that is shed annually. 
Evergreen: A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round. 
Ground cover: Low growing, spreading plants, other than turf grass, such as but not limited to ivy, liriope, juniper, mondo grass or sedge. 
Landscape materials: Any combination of living plant materials and nonliving materials such as rocks, pebbles, wood chips, mulch and pavers, and decorative features, including sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, and pools. Synthetic landscaping materials acceptable to the zoning official may also be used. 
Mulch: Pine straw, pine or cypress bark, pebbles, lava rock or synthetic landscaping materials acceptable to the zoning official. 
Shrub: A self-supporting woody plant that normally reaches a height of less than 15 feet, such as but not limited to azalea, boxwood, yew, hydrangea, holly, nandina or camellia. 
Tree: A large, woody plant that has one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches, and that normally reaches a height of 15 feet or more. May be classified as deciduous or evergreen. 
Tree, shade: A broadleaf tree that has a single trunk and which will reach at least 35 feet in height and 35 feet in spread at maturity. In defining such trees, reference may be made to the latest editions of Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia (Cooperative Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625) and The Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1911. - Frontage landscape strips. 
(a)  Frontage landscape strips; where required. 
(1)  Single-family residential subdivisions and lots are exempt from the requirements of this section 1911. 
(2)  All properties having frontage on US 301 shall provide landscape strips along US 301 and along their respective service roads, located as described in section 1906(c)(5). 
(3)  For all other properties having frontage on a public street other than US 301, multi-family, office, institutional, commercial and industrial projects located in the R-3, PUD, MHP, GC, NC, LI or HI zoning districts shall provide and maintain a continuous 20-foot wide frontage landscape strip (exclusive of driveways) adjacent to all public street rights-of-way. 
(4)  All minimum required landscape strips shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this section and shall be provided with an installed irrigation system. The location and detail of all required landscaping shall be depicted on the site landscaping plan required under section 1913. 
(b)  Location of structures in frontage landscape strips. If a frontage landscape strip is required, it shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, non-landscaped or wet pond storm water detention facilities, or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
(1)  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(2)  Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks. 
(3)  Underground utilities and fire hydrants. 
(4)  Driveways required to access the property. 
(5)  Signs otherwise permitted by the IGO district and this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Landscaping required in frontage landscape strips. 
(1)  All portions of a required frontage landscape strip shall be covered by landscape materials, as defined in this article, except for those ground areas that are covered by permitted structures. A minimum of 50 percent of the required landscape area shall be covered with living plant materials. 
(2)  Shrubs are to be provided within the frontage landscape strip at the rate of three shrubs for every ten linear feet of street frontage, or portion thereof (excluding driveways). Shrubs must be at least 18 inches tall at the time of planting, and be of a species that will normally exceed two feet in height at maturity. 
(3)  Trees may be planted in a frontage landscape strip in lieu of shrubs in a ratio of one tree equals six shrubs. Such trees must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions. Upon planting, new deciduous trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches and new evergreen trees shall be at least six feet tall. 
(4)  Plant materials may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location and design, except for trees required for tree-line planting along US 301. 
(5)  Along US 301, within the frontage landscape strip adjacent to the highway, trees shall be planted in a line five feet from the right-of-way line of US 301. Trees shall be spaced 40 feet on center and located in multiples of 40 feet from the nearest intersection of the rights-of-way of US 301 and I-16 on the same side of the highway as the frontage landscape strip. 

a.  Such trees along US 301 must be one or any combination of the following species: 
1.  Japanese cryptomeria; 
2.  Leyland cypress; or 
3.  Bald cypress. 
b.  An alternate but equivalent tree species approved by a Georgia Registered Landscape Architect for growing conditions on a particular property may be considered for approval by the zoning official under the provisions of section 1913(c)(2). 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1912. - Parking lot plantings. 
(a)  Parking lot internal planting areas. The following requirements of this section apply to any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five motor vehicles or more for residents, employees, customers or visitors in the R-3, PUD, MHP, GC, NC, LI or HI zoning districts within the IGO district. Parking lots designed and intended for the storage of vehicles owned by the business on site overnight (such as a company fleet), or maintains a stock of vehicles as part of its business activities (such as a car sales lot, a salvage and wrecking yard, car rental agency, etc.), are not subject to the requirements of this Section 1912. 
(b)  Trees required in parking lots. At least one shade tree or evergreen tree (as defined in this article), occupying a planting space of at least 150 square feet each, shall be furnished for each ten parking spaces in the parking lot. 
(1)  Trees must be placed in or around the parking lot such that every parking space is within 50 feet of a tree. The 50-foot distance is measured from the center of the tree to any point within the parking space. 

  

(2)  New shade trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches upon planting, or a height of no less than six feet for evergreens, and shall be maintained in good condition. Trees that must be removed as a result of disease, damage or death, must be replaced. 
(c)  Standards for parking lot planting areas. 
(1)  Landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be located within the parking lot and shall constitute at least ten percent of the entire area devoted to parking spaces, aisles and connecting driveways. 
(2)  Landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be landscaped with any combination of such plant materials as trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those areas that are mulched. Such planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil; and shall be provided with an installed irrigation system. 
(3)  As a minimum, a landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall extend the length of the parking bay and shall be no less than 8 feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. 

(4)  Landscape islands between side-by-side parking spaces shall be no less than eight feet in width and extend for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. Landscaping strips between head-to-head parking spaces shall be no less than eight feet in width without wheel stops, or five feet in width when provided with wheel stops in the parking spaces such that no vehicular overhang is permitted. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1913. - Landscaping plans; plant materials. 
(a)  Landscaping plans; when required. 
(1)  The provisions of this section do not apply to landscaping of any kind that exceeds or is otherwise not required by the landscaping requirements of this article. 
(2)  Site landscaping plans are required upon application for a development permit or for a building permit for new construction of buildings or any development to which landscaping requirements of this article apply. 
(3)  Site landscaping plans shall be required for only that phase of development for which the development permit or building permit is being requested. 
(4)  In cases where approval of the required landscaping plans would cause harmful delay to the start of construction, the zoning official may issue footing and foundation permits for the project so that construction may proceed, pending approval of the landscaping plans. 
(5)  Authorization for construction beyond the footing and foundation shall not be issued until the required site landscaping plans have been submitted and approved. 
(b)  Landscaping plans; specifications. All site landscaping as required by this article for frontage landscape strips and parking lot plantings shall be illustrated on plans as described in this subsection. 
(1)  Scale at one inch equals 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
(2)  Caption: 
a.  The name of the development and its total acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
b.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and developer. 
c.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the applicant. 
d.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared, if any, shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
e.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(3)  The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities within the landscaping area, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and storm water detention areas. 
(4)  The outline of all existing (to remain) and proposed buildings and structures. 
(5)  The boundaries of all areas required to remain undisturbed. 
(6)  The location and details of any buffer or other screening required under article 4 of this zoning ordinance. 
(7)  The boundaries of each required landscape frontage strip and parking lot planting area. 
(8)  A planting plan showing the location, size, and the botanical and common names of proposed plant materials. 
(9)  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this article for landscape strips or parking lot landscaping. 
(c)  Acceptable plant materials. The following are the minimum plant sizes and conditions to be used in satisfying the requirements of this article. Acceptable plant materials for landscaping shall be as approved by a Georgia Registered Landscape Architect if deviations from these standards are desired by the developer. 
(1)  New plant materials. 
a.  Medium shrubs (those having a mature height of four feet or less), 18 by 24-inch balled and burlapped meeting the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1 (2004 or latest adopted edition). 
b.  Large shrubs (those having a mature height greater than four feet), 24 by 30-inch balled and burlapped meeting the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z60.1 (2004 or latest adopted edition). 
c.  Ground cover, two and one-half-inch pot. 
d.  Deciduous trees, minimum two-inch caliper. 
e.  Evergreen trees, minimum six feet high at the time of planting. 
The American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association for Nurserymen, may be referred to for the determination of plant standards. 
(2)  Approval of plant materials. Approval of a proposal to use a specific landscaping material shall be subject to a determination by the zoning official that the proposed material is approved by a Georgia Registered Landscape Architect as the most appropriate for: 
a.  The specific location, given surrounding land uses on nearby properties, and 
b.  The specific topography, soil, existing vegetation, and other factors that may influence the effectiveness of a landscaping material. 
(d)  Installation and maintenance of plant materials. 
(1)  Installation of plant materials. Plant materials, as required by the provisions of this article, shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The zoning official may allow up to one planting season in a 12-month period in which the installation of plant materials shall be completed, subject to the performance surety requirements, below. 
(2)  Performance surety. 
a.  In such cases as when planting stock availability is low or weather conditions are not appropriate for planting, the project owner may postpone planting until the next planting season; provided that performance surety is posted with Bulloch County in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Surety shall be in cash held in escrow or an irrevocable letter of credit submitted to the zoning official, with the appropriate documentation. 
2.  Surety shall be provided in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of plant materials, installation and two-year guarantee as demonstrated by a signed contract between the owner and their landscape contractor, and as approved by the zoning official. 
b.  An inspection shall be made by the zoning official of all landscape plantings to assure compliance with plan requirements prior to release of the performance surety. The performance surety will be drawn upon by Bulloch County at the time of expiration if the planting requirements have not been fulfilled, or if the owner has not requested an extension. One three-month extension may be permitted with documented justification acceptable to the zoning official. Any inspections performed after the final inspection (for project release) are subject to re-inspection fee schedules. 
(3)  Maintenance surety. 
a.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or prior to release of a performance surety provided under this section (whichever last occurs), a maintenance surety in the form of a letter of credit or cash escrow account in a form acceptable to the zoning official is required for all plant materials installed as a result of the requirements of this article. The developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all such plant materials for two years from the date of acceptance of the maintenance bond. 
b.  The value of the maintenance surety shall be equal to 25 percent of the actual cost of installation of the plant materials. The cost of installation shall be evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the zoning official in accordance with generally established costs for the industry. 
(4)  Maintenance of required plant materials. 
a.  The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, and their successors and assigns shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance in good condition of the plant materials used to meet the minimum landscaping requirements of this article. This responsibility is in addition to and survives the release of any maintenance surety provided for the property by the developer. 
b.  Plants that are diseased, unsurvivably damaged or are dead, shall be removed and replaced with a plant of the same species, variety or cultivar, as acceptable to the zoning official. 
c.  Other landscape materials shall be maintained in proper repair and shall be kept clear of refuse and debris. 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
Section 1914. - Water and sewer. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Planned development refers to new private or public land developments within or partially within the IGO district approved by the county according to a development plan and consisting of residential subdivisions of five or more lots, commercial subdivisions of two or more lots, two-family or multi-family developments with a net density of two units per acre or greater, planned unit developments as provided for in article 12 of appendix C — zoning, sections 1201 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of Bulloch County, Georgia, or a single unit commercial or industrial development with an estimated usage of 1,000 gallons per day or more of wastewater calculated pursuant to the City of Statesboro's Aid-to-Construction Fee ordinance in accordance with City of Statesboro Code section 82-176. 
(2)  New development refers to new private or public land developments within or partially within the IGO district that are not a planned development, a farm, or a single family residential property. 
(b)  Planned developments or new developments located on property within or partially within the IGO district shall be required to connect to the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure pursuant to water/sewer agreement "A" for tax allocation district #1, included herein as appendix 19.1, if any portion of the planned development's property or new development's property is located within 1,000 linear feet of any component of the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the planned development or new development water and sewer service, or if due to expansion of the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure the planned development's property or new development's property becomes located within 1,000 linear feet of any component of the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the planned development or new development water and sewer service. 
(c)  If a planned development or new development located on property that is within or partially within the IGO district is not located within 1,000 linear feet of any component of the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the planned development or new development water and sewer service, then the planned development or new development may install a private water system and sewer disposal system in anticipation of future connection to the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure pursuant to the terms and conditions in water/sewer agreement "B" for tax allocation district #1, included herein as appendix 19.2. 
(d)  The City of Statesboro and the county reserve the right to grant a joint waiver of a planned development's or new development's obligation imposed by the county on planned developments or new developments within the IGO district to connect to the City of Statesboro's water and sewer infrastructure. The county and the City of Statesboro shall act in good faith in considering a request for waiver, and the grant of a waiver shall not be unreasonably withheld by either the county or the City of Statesboro. 
APPENDIX 19.1. - WATER/SEWER AGREEMENT "A" FOR TAX ALLOCATION DISTRICT #1 
GEORGIA, BULLOCH COUNTY 
THIS AGREEMENT entered into this ___ day of ________, 20___ by and between the MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF STATESBORO , a municipal corporation, its assigns and successors, hereinafter referred to as "City" and ___________, their heirs, assigns and successors, hereinafter referred to as "Developer", the developer of the project known as ___________. 
WHEREAS , in regard to extending and making additions to the City's water and/or sanitary sewer systems and also to the construction of water distribution and/or sanitary sewer collection and disposal systems to serve the property known as ___________; located at ___________ and 
WHEREAS , the engineering design for said water and sanitary sewer systems will be accomplished by competent, professional engineers registered in the State of Georgia; 
NOW THEREFORE , the City and ___________ covenant and agree as follows: 
1. City shall approve the designation of the engineer who shall be responsible for the engineering design and inspection in connection with the installation of said water and sanitary sewer systems. The Developer shall be responsible for providing resident inspection during construction and for insuring the engineer's conformance to area planning, adequacy of design, and conformance to City requirements regarding location, size and depth of lines, capacity and arrangements of lift stations and quality of construction. The Developer shall provide to the City a statement from the project engineer certifying that the materials and workmanship including pipes, bedding, thrust blocks, valves, fire hydrants, manholes, lift station equipment and other related materials and work meet the approved specifications and plans. Upon request of the City, the certification shall be substantiated by material affidavits from suppliers and by applicable test results for inflow/infiltration, exfiltration, deflection, pressure, leaks, bacteria, compaction and other tests required by the City. All construction, engineering and inspection costs in connection with these systems shall be borne by the Developer. The City will provide only the sewage treatment facility and the water supply facility. 
2. The Developer will pay a five hundred ($500.00) dollar non-refundable fee to the City of Statesboro to cover the costs for the City's Consulting Engineers to review plans for compliance with the City's Long Range Water and Sewer Master Plan as well as the Long Range Water and Sewer Master Plan adopted for Tax Allocation District One by BULLOCH COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and the MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF STATESBORO. This fee will also cover the costs for said Engineer to update the Water and Sewer Master Plan as per the development and to update the City's water/sewer location maps to include this extension of mains. The Developer covenants and agrees to reimburse the City for additional inspection time on unfamiliar contractors until such time as the contractor is approved by the City. 
3. Both parties covenant and agree that if the project is located outside the City Limits, but is not contiguous to the City Limits, in order to receive utilities from the City, the Developer will comply with the City's Water and Sewer access, design and construction standards. Except for the City's water and sewer access, design and construction standards, the County's developmental regulations, e.g. the County's comprehensive plan, the district redevelopment plan, land development standards, zoning, permitting, regulations and review processes not in conflict with the City's water and sewer access, design and construction standards shall apply. 
4. The Developer shall hold the City harmless and indemnify City against any damages due to work associated with the tie on of existing water or sanitary sewer lines. 
5. Both parties covenant and agree that upon completion of the systems and all related facilities, including all associated water and sewage fees being fully paid for by the Developer (except the sewage treatment facility and the water supply facility) and after the submission of "as built" drawings (one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the City and two blueprint plans), the City will, subject to approval of the City Engineer, accept title thereto and assume responsibility for maintenance and operation of those portions located within public easements or rights of way. The acceptance shall include all rights, title and interest that the Developer has in the water and sanitary sewer systems servicing the said project and also all easements and/or rights of way required for the purpose of maintenance thereof. Developer agrees to execute any further documentation, such as a Bill of Sale and/or Easement, upon request of the City as may be necessary to transfer title to the systems. The Developer shall bear the costs for the proper recording of all water and sewer easements. Those portions of the facilities not so conveyed by the Developer such as single use lines, shall remain the responsibility of the Developer or its assigns as to the ownership and maintenance. 
6. The Developer warrants the water and sanitary sewer systems to include all parts, piping and pumping devices that make up the water or sewer system against defects and improper installation for a period of one (1) year from the date the City accepts the system. During the one (1) year warranty any repairs to the system will be made at the expense of the Developer and any street repairs necessitated for the maintenance and repair of the water system and/or sanitary sewer systems will also be at the expense of the Developer. 
7. The Developer agrees to, whenever possible, acquire and dedicate right-of ways and/or easements necessary to connect the project to the City's water and sewer infrastructure. In the event the developer cannot acquire and dedicate rights of ways and/or easements necessary to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure, and the City's subsequently acquires the needed rights of ways and/or easements necessary to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure, then the owner or developer shall reimburse that Party for all costs associated with acquiring the needed rights of ways and/or easements. 
8. Upon approval engineering and design plans by the City, and if no rights of ways, easements or other property rights must be obtained to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure the Developer must connect the project to the City's water and sewer infrastructure within the District within ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY (180) days. 
9. Upon approval of the engineering and design plans by the City, and if rights of ways, easements or other property rights must be obtained to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure the Developer must connect the project to the City's water and sewer infrastructure within the District within THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIVE (365) days. 
10. In the event the Developer sells any or all of the property containing the project prior to connecting to the City's water and sewer infrastructure, the developer shall upon sale include appropriate deed restrictions requiring all subsequent owners of the property to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure. 
11. Both parties covenant and agree that all costs, including construction, land, legal and engineering, in connection with the addition and/or installation of the system shall be borne by the Developer. It shall be the Developer's responsibility to obtain all the necessary regulatory permits and approvals. It is understood and agreed by and between the parties that the City's sole responsibility will be to provide the sewage treatment facility, the water supply facility and any water and sewer mains that may already be in place. 
12. Developer acknowledges that there is an Aid to Construction fee (ATC) for each gallon of sewage accepted by the City from Developer for treatment. This fee shall be imposed in accordance with the current City rates in effect and shall be paid by Developer to the City upon execution of this Agreement. The current rate is $_____ per gallon per day of sewage accepted by the City for treatment. The City calculates that _____ gallons per day of sewage from the Project will be treated by the City. The Developer, therefore, tenders the amount of $_____ to the City in payment of this fee. If it becomes apparent that the amount of sewage to be treated by the City will exceed the amount set forth above, Developer shall immediately tender such payment of the ATC fees to the City as is required. It shall be the responsibility of the City to correctly calculate the gallons of sewage from the Project to be treated by the City. The City's calculations shall be consistent with the City's schedule of contributory load factors. The ATC fee is payable upon execution of the agreement. 
13. It is understood and agreed by and between the parties that there shall be a sanitary sewer connection fee and a separate water connection fee in accordance with the current City rates in effect. The connection fees shall be paid upon issuance of a building permit. 
14. Developer acknowledges that the City shall be the sole provider of water for consumption or irrigation and covenants and agrees not to obtain a private well or obtain water from any source other than the City. 
15. This agreement may not be transferred or assigned in whole or of any part by Developer without prior written consent of the City and any violation of this agreement shall terminate the City's obligation hereunder. 
16. This agreement is to be governed by Georgia Law and it is understood and agreed by and between the parties that all provisions of both state and federal law now or hereafter in effect relating to water and sewage service shall be applicable to this Agreement. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF all parties have set their hands and seals on this day of ________, 20___. 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF STATESBORO 
BY:  ___________ 
ATTEST:___________ 
Signed, sealed and delivered  in the presence of: 
___________  Witness 
___________  Notary Public 
DEVELOPER 
BY:  ___________ 
ATTEST:___________ 
Signed, sealed and delivered  in the presence of: 
___________  Witness 
___________  Notary Public 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
APPENDIX 19.2. - WATER/SEWER AGREEMENT "B" FOR TAX ALLOCATION DISTRICT #1 
GEORGIA, BULLOCH COUNTY 
THIS AGREEMENT entered into this ___ day of ________, 20___ by and between the MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF STATESBORO , a municipal corporation, its assigns and successors, hereinafter referred to as "City" and ___________, their heirs, assigns and successors, hereinafter referred to as "Developer", the developer of the project known as ___________. 
WHEREAS , this project is located within or partially within Tax Allocation District One, but is not currently located within one thousand (1,000) linear feet of any component of the City's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the project water and sewer service; 
WHEREAS , the Developer needs to install a private water system and sewer disposal system to serve the project the property known as ___________; located at ___________ in anticipation of future connection to the City's water and sewer infrastructure; 
WHEREAS , the engineering design for said private water system and sewer disposal system will be accomplished by competent, professional engineers registered in the State of Georgia; 
NOW THEREFORE , the City and ___________ covenant and agree as follows: 
1. City shall approve the designation of the engineer who shall be responsible for the engineering design and inspection in connection with the installation of said water system and sewer disposal system. The Developer shall be responsible for providing resident inspection during construction and for insuring the engineer's conformance to the applicable City's Water and Sewer access, design and construction standards. The Developer shall provide to the City a statement from the project engineer certifying that the materials and workmanship other related materials and work meet the approved specifications and plans. Upon request of the City, the certification shall be substantiated by material affidavits from suppliers and by applicable test results for inflow/infiltration, exfiltration, deflection, pressure, leaks, bacteria, compaction and other tests required by the City. All construction, engineering and inspection costs in connection with the private water system and sewer disposal system shall be borne by the Developer. 
2. The Developer will pay a five hundred ($500.00) dollar non-refundable fee to the City of Statesboro to cover the costs for the City's Consulting Engineers to review plans for compliance with the City's Water and Sewer access, design and construction standards. The Developer covenants and agrees to reimburse the City for additional inspection time on unfamiliar contractors until such time as the contractor is approved by the City. 
3. The Developer warrants that the private water system and sewer disposal system shall comply with City's Water and Sewer access, design and construction standards as well as all other applicable State and Federal laws and regulations. 
4. The Developer covenants and agrees that when any part of the property containing the project becomes located within one thousand (1,000) linear feet of any component of the City's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the project water and sewer service, the Developer shall cause the project to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure pursuant to the conditions set forth in the "Water/Sewer Agreement "A" for Tax Allocation District #1" a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A to this agreement. 
5. In the event any or all of the property containing the project is sold prior to connecting to the City's water and sewer infrastructure, the developer shall upon sale include appropriate deed restrictions requiring all subsequent owners of the property to connect to the City's water and sewer infrastructure pursuant to the conditions set forth in the "Water/Sewer Agreement "A" for Tax Allocation District #1", a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A to this agreement, when any part of the property containing the project becomes located within one thousand (1,000) linear feet of any component of the City's water and sewer infrastructure capable of providing the project water and sewer service. 
6. Both parties covenant and agree that all costs, including construction, land, legal and engineering, in connection with the addition and/or installation of the private water system and sewer disposal system shall be borne by the Developer. It shall be the Developer's responsibility to obtain all the necessary regulatory permits and approvals. 
7. This agreement may not be transferred or assigned in whole or of any part by Developer without prior written consent of the City and any violation of this agreement shall terminate the City's obligation hereunder. 
8. This agreement is to be governed by Georgia Law and it is understood and agreed by and between the parties that all provisions of both state and federal law now or hereafter in effect relating to water and sewage service shall be applicable to this Agreement. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF all parties have set their hands and seals on this ___ day of _______, 20___. 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF STATESBORO 
BY:  ___________ 
ATTEST:___________ 
Signed, sealed and delivered  in the presence of: 
___________  Witness 
___________  Notary Public 
DEVELOPER 
BY:  ___________ 
ATTEST: ___________ 
(Amend. of 9-2-14) 
ARTICLE 20. - CP CONSERVATION PRESERVATION DISTRICT 

Section 2001. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of this section that the CP district be established and maintained to preserve and/or control development within certain land, marsh, and/or water areas of the county which: 
(1)  Provide needed open space for the health and general welfare of the county's inhabitants; 
(2)  Are utilized for outdoor recreation purposes; 
(3)  Possess great natural beauty or are of historical significance; 
(4)  Are subject to periodic flooding. 
The regulations which apply within this district are designed to reserve such areas for the purposes outlined herein and to discourage any encroachment by residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses capable of adversely affecting relatively undeveloped character of the district. 
Section 2002. - Boundaries of CP districts. 
The official map (Section 2301 of this appendix) shows the boundaries of all CP districts within the county. Article 23 also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
Section 2003. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses shall be permitted in any CP district: 
(1)  Boat house or noncommercial dock (private). 
(2)  Government: Local, state, federal. 
(3)  Farm. 
(4)  Wildlife refuge, including caretakers' residence as an accessory use. 
(5)  Swimming beach. 
(6)  Utility substations. 
(b)  The following are considered conditional uses in the CP district: 
(1)  Marina (commercial). 
(2)  Museum or exhibit area. 
(Ord. No. 1997-40, 12-2-97; Amd. of 12-2-08) 
ARTICLE 21. - PROTECTION OF RIVER CORRIDOR 

Section 2101. - Purposes. 
(a)  This article provides for the protection of river corridors and the regulation of activities in or adjacent to those corridors; provides for the powers and duties of the county and other governmental entities; provides for goals, guidelines, practices, procedures, policies, rules, and regulations; provides for minimum standards for regulated activities within river corridors and their buffers which natural resources of the county are of vital importance to this county and its citizens; provides for enforcement; prohibits certain activities or actions; provides for civil and other penalties; repeals conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
(b)  The state has determined that its river corridors are of vital importance in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. River corridors are fragile natural resources subject to flood, erosion, soil-bearing capacity limitation, and other natural and human induced hazards. In their natural state, they serve multiple functions for pollution control, aquifer recharge and discharge, storage and passage of flood water, and erosion and sedimentation control, as well as wildlife habitat, education, scientific study, open space and recreation, and scenic and aesthetic beauty. 
(c)  The Comprehensive Planning Act of 1989 provides for the development of coordinated and comprehensive planning by municipal and county governments. Such comprehensive plans shall consider the natural resources, environments, and vital areas within the jurisdiction of the local governments. Additionally, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 authorizes the department of natural resources to develop minimum planning standards and procedures for the protection of river corridors in the state and requires local governments to use these minimum standards in developing and implementing local comprehensive plans. The method mandated in O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 for protecting river corridors is establishing a natural vegetative buffer bordering each protected river. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2102. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the terms listed below shall be defined as follows. 
(a)  Board. Bulloch County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  Buffer or buffer area. A landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses. See also "river corridor." 
(c)  Comprehensive plan. The Joint Comprehensive Plan for Bulloch County, the Town of Brooklet, the Town of Portal, and the Town of Register, Georgia, dated April 1993, and as may be amended. 
(d)  Contaminant. Any "regulated substance," as defined by the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as in effect on the date of passage of this article and as amended from time to time, and all petroleum products, including gasoline, oil, waste oils, and other fuels as well as their hazardous constituents. 
(e)  County. Bulloch County, Georgia. 
(f)  Hazardous material. Any "contaminant" as defined in this article, and any hazardous chemical for which a material safety data sheet must be filed under 42 USC 11021 and 11022. 
(g)  Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency according to federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR § 261.3. 
(h)  Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 6.5-28, paragraph 5, of the Bulloch County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, 1992, as amended. 
(i)  Land uses existing prior to the effective date of this article. Any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which falls within one of the following categories prior to the effective date of this article (July 6, 1999): 
(1)  The use or activity is completed; 
(2)  The use or activity is under construction; 
(3)  The use or activity is fully approved by the county; 
(4)  All materials for the use or activity have been submitted for approval by the county; or 
(5)  The property is zoned for such use or activity and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
(j)  Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area. A river corridor containing the flora native to that area. Natural vegetative buffers are areas within 100 feet on either side of the banks of a protected river. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
(k)  Perennial river. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
(l)  Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(m)  Protected river. Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. In the county, the Ogeechee River is a protected river. 
(n)  Public utility or utilities. A service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or services and including all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
(o)  River bank. The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
(p)  River corridor. All land, including islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., or the Coastal Marshland Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq., in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by local governments in the same manner as the river corridor. Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purpose of this article, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the local comprehensive plan as established by the department of community affairs. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the start of the review period will require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next review by the department of community affairs. 
(q)  Sensitive natural area. Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources, and which are sensitive to physical or biological alteration. 
(r)  Single-family dwelling. A single residential detached building, manufactured home or site-built, designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
(s)  Surface mining. Any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores, and dimension stone, and other solid matter for sale or for processing or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2103. - Applicability. 
The standards and procedures detailed in this article shall be applicable to unincorporated Bulloch County and all state owned or administered land. The protected river corridor applies to land adjacent to the Ogeechee River. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2104. - Protection criteria. 
The following protection criteria shall apply within the river corridor: 
(a)  A 100-foot natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained adjacent to the river corridor except as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited within the river corridor, except as provided in section 2105 of this article. 
(c)  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the river corridor. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2105. - Permitted activities within the river corridor. 
Unless otherwise prohibited in the zoning district in which the property is located, the following uses and activities shall be permitted within the river corridor: 
(a)  Detached single-family dwellings and their customary appurtenances subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dwelling and its customary appurtenances shall comply with all development standards for the particular zoning district in which the property is located (including lot size), building codes, and any other local regulations. 
(2)  The dwelling must be located on a tract of land containing two acres. Where a tract includes any portion of the protected river, the area between the river banks cannot be counted towards the two-acre minimum tract size. (Note: the minimum lot size may be greater than two acres depending on the zoning district in which the property is located.) 
(3)  Only one dwelling is permitted on each two acre or larger tract. 
(4)  Septic tank or tanks serving the dwelling may be located within the buffer. 
(5)  Septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer. 
(b)  Construction of road crossings and utility crossings provided that the construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, as amended, and any applicable local ordinances pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the effective date of this article (July 6, 1999) are exempt from the protection criteria of this article, provided that: 
(1)  The use of the river corridor does not impair the drinking quality of the river water; and 
(2)  The activity within the river corridor meets all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(d)  Timber production and harvesting provided that the activity is consistent with the state forestry commission's best management practices and the activity does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(e)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(f)  Waste water treatment. 
(g)  Recreational usage consistent with either the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. 
(h)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(i)  Agricultural production and management provided that the activity is consistent with the state soil and water conservation commission's best management practices and the activity does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Clean Water Act, as amended. Additionally, the activity must be consistent with all other state and federal laws and state department of agriculture regulations. 
(j)  Any other uses permitted by the department of natural resources or under § 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2106. - Prohibited activities within the river corridor. 
Irrespective of the zoning district in which the property is located, the following uses and activities shall be prohibited within the river corridor: 
(a)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills, or construction and demolition (C&D) landfills. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial uses that involve handling hazardous materials other than wastes. 
(c)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste. 
(d)  Construction within the river corridor is prohibited unless permitted in section 2105 of this article. 
(e)  Surface mining activities. 
(f)  Any other use or activity not specifically permitted in section 2105 of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2107. - Variances. 
Variances to the requirements of this article may be granted in accordance with section 411 of this appendix. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2108. - Penalties and enforcement. 
Penalties for violation of this article and the enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with sections 418 and 419 of this appendix. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2109. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
Prior to the commencement of any development activities, the permitting process outlined in section 408 of this appendix must be followed. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
Section 2110. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of this Code, including appendix C, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99) 
ARTICLE 22. - SIGNS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 5, 2011(2), in effect repealed the former Art. 22, §§ 2201—2217, and enacted a new Art. 22 as set out herein. The former Art. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances of March 4, 2003 and January 2, 2007. 

Section 2201. - Purposes. 
The Bulloch County Board of Commissioners have determined that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county that a comprehensive and balanced system of control and regulation be enacted as to the placement, maintenance and removal of signs within the limits of the county, said determination having been derived from, but not limited to the following concerns: 
(a)  The safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian traffic through the county which may otherwise be impeded by the indiscriminate proliferation of signage erected to attract the attention of the traveling public, and which if left unregulated, may result in hazards to travelers through the erection of increased numbers of larger, brighter or more distracting signs by owners attempting to convey competing messages; 
(b)  The protection of property values, both public and private, by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses while balancing the community's variant interests of enhancing the commercial and economic atmosphere of the county with the desire to maintain a tranquil aesthetic environment that eliminates visual clutter and blight through the management of hardscape features, including signage; 
(c)  The interference with the ability of property owners to enjoy or use their property without undue visual obstruction, distraction or hazard; 
(d)  The preservation and protection of properties and areas having historic, recreational, educational, cultural, or religious values and environments, and prominent community gateways and major thoroughfares which, through orderly design and maintenance of the built environment—including signage—provide for community pride and exhibit clear community expectations that promote investment through a predictable development pattern; 
(e)  The elimination of potential hazards arising during times of inclement weather or other natural disaster; 
(f)  The provision of some signage that has the targeted purpose of promoting public safety but is difficult to describe without referring to its incidental function, such as address numerals or subdivision or major development entrance signage, which signage is a tool for enabling the traveling public and emergency personnel to locate point of ingress and egress during visitation or emergency call response. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this article, the provisions of this article are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners; 
(g)  The control of the proliferation and placement of signs in an indiscriminate manner so as to pose a threat to the aesthetic and environmental values and qualities of life within Bulloch County; 
(h)  Increasingly vibrant and distracting signs, including those incorporating LED and similar technology, cause unique and substantial hazards to traffic caused by a higher level of distractability, are inconsistent with the standards established for major community thoroughfares and gateways, and demand greater diligence and resources in enforcing proper use and display than those signs not incorporating such technology; and, 
(i)  In addition to the other concerns stated within this section, specific districts, thoroughfares and gateways throughout the community, due to traffic volumes, population density, proximity to major community facilities, or other similar factors, may—absent the provision of reasonable land management regulations—be more susceptible to the proliferation of signage, banners and other similar displays than other parts of the county; certain of these districts, thoroughfares and gateways that have otherwise been determined by the community to be of significant importance in maintaining an orderly, moderated and consistent development pattern and a community character free of visual clutter include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Veterans Memorial Highway. The county's principal by-way alternatively serves as a community greenway, providing for areas of natural landscape; and, where flanked by development, a soft transition between the natural and built environment. With few direct vehicular access points to adjacent property, abutting properties will remain rural or develop in a residential manner. Signs on this thoroughfare must remain limited in number and scale to avoid the inadvertent placement of signage in proximity to the county's neighborhoods and greenspaces that would not otherwise be permitted in residential areas and on residential streets. The allowance for unregulated signage will further reduce the highway's function as a community parkway, contradicting the community interest of providing for an orderly visual environment. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2202. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or titles are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Aggregate sign area. The combined sign area of all permanent signs on a single lot that require a permit except for billboards, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers; or, where specified, all permanent permitted signs of a particular category on a single lot. For example, the aggregate sign area of all freestanding signs on a lot is the sum total of the sign areas of all freestanding signs on such lot. 
Animated sign. A sign that utilizes moving structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated methods to create movement, the appearance of movement, or other special effects. Signs meeting the definition of and regulations governing changeable copy signs and traffic control devices and warning signs meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are not considered animated signs. 
Banner. Any sign printed or displayed on lightweight fabric or other flexible material with or without frames and that is mounted to a pole or building at more than one edge. When mounted, banners shall remain stationary and not flap or wave in a manner similar to a flag or pennant. Flags and pennants shall not be considered banners. 
Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Billboard. A freestanding sign having a sign area of greater than 150 square feet. 
Building sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building. 
Bulloch County. As used in this article, the term Bulloch County means the unincorporated areas of Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Canopy or awning. A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building and/or supported by the ground. 
Canopy sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or other structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of letters, words, logos, or symbols through manual means without altering the face or surface of the sign, or creating movement or the appearance of movement. 
Electronic message center sign. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
Flag. Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols. 
Flashing sign. A sign utilizing a pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates suddenly between illuminated and non-illuminated for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign. 
Frame effect. The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Freestanding sign. A sign which is attached to, or part of, a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure. Freestanding signs may take the form of either monument or stanchion signs as defined herein. 
Incidental sign. A sign of no more than two square feet that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of incidental signs include but are not limited to "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "loading zone" and other similar traffic related directives. 
LED sign. Any sign or portion thereof that utilizes light emitting diode technology or other similar semi-conductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this article, a LED sign is not considered to be a form of changeable copy sign. 
Lot. Any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a legal instrument of record, and that meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material to provide protection from the weather. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign which forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign which, while legal at the time of erection, does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
Normal grade. The lower of existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating for the purpose of locating the sign. 
Pennant. Any lightweight fabric or other similar material, message or no message, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Pole sign. See stanchion sign. 
Portable sign. Any sign which because of its design or construction was originally intended to be portable, whether or not such sign has been attached or affixed to the ground or other permanent structure. The term portable sign includes but is not limited to portable changeable copy signs, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A- or T-frames, menu and sandwich board signs, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers parked and visible from the public right-of-way unless said vehicle or trailer is regularly used for some other significant purpose consistent with the purposes for which it was designed in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
Principal building. The main or principal building located upon a lot; the building in which the principal use of the premises is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly additional uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall and its leading edge extends beyond the line of such building or wall or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or wall to which it is affixed by more than 12 inches. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained in whole or in part upon, against, or above the eave of a peaked roof or parapet line of a flat roof. 
Setback. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sign. Any fixture, placard, structure, or device illuminated or nonilluminated that uses any color, form, graphic, symbol, or writing to convey information of any kind and which is visible to the public from streets and/or public property. 
Special event sign. See temporary sign. 
Spectacular sign or device. Signs or devices, whether permanent or temporary, utilizing out of the ordinary materials, configurations or devices, including, but not limited to (i) balloons; (ii) animated animal forms; and (iii) other attention-getting devices. "Spectacular sign or device" does not include banners, flags or pennants meeting the standards of this article. 
Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the sign face is elevated above ground level and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the sign face. 
Standard informational sign. A sign with an area not greater than four and one-half square feet, with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
Street. A strip of land or way, subject to vehicular as well as pedestrian traffic, that provides direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, lanes, highways, roads, or other thoroughfares. 
Street frontage. The distance for which a lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street. 
Suspended sign. Any sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that by its design and construction is intended to be used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted or anchored. This definition excludes "portable signs" and "standard informational signs," which are separately defined under this article. 
Tri-vision sign. A sign designed with a series of slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show multiple different sign messages in sequence. For purposes of this article, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Wall sign. Any sign painted on or erected within 12 inches and parallel to an exterior wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only on one sign surface. 
Window sign. Any writing, pictures, symbols, or combination thereof, attached to, placed upon, or painted on the interior of a door or window or upon the window panes or glass and visible from the exterior of the window or door. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2203. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on an application form prescribed by the county. The applicant must be the property owner or the lessee of the lot on which the sign will be located, or an agent or representative of the property owner or lessee. 
(b)  Permit for new sign or for sign modification. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by a detailed illustration of the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each sign in the format prescribed within the official application form. 
(c)  Fees. Fees shall be set forth in the Bulloch County schedule of fees and charges. 
(d)  Action. Within 15 business days of the submission of an application for a sign permit, including required and accompanying materials as provided in section 2203(b) of this article, the zoning administrator shall either: 
(1)  Issue the permit where it is found that such sign application is complete and the proposed sign adheres to the standards of this article and other applicable requirements of county ordinances and state law; or 
(2)  Deny the permit where the application is incomplete, contains false material statements or where the proposed sign would violate standards of the ordinance from which this article is derived or other ordinances or state laws regulating signage. Any denial of a permit shall be in writing and shall include a specification of the section(s) of the ordinance, or applicable provision of other county ordinances or state laws with which the sign is inconsistent. The denial shall be based upon and shall cite to the specific articulated standards in this article, or other law, and shall not be based upon or cited to the general concerns contained in section 2201 herein. A denied application later resubmitted in conformity with this ordinance shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, rather than on the date of original submission. A decision to deny a permit shall be in writing and shall be served on the permit applicant either by hand delivery or by first class mail to the address provided by the applicant no later than 15 business days after initial receipt of the application. 
(e)  Lapse of permit. If construction of a sign for which a permit has been issued has not begun within six months of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall lapse and become null and void. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to obtain another permit prior to constructing or modifying the sign. 
(f)  Inspections. Upon substantial completion of the construction or modification of a billboard or other permanent sign for which a permit has been issued, the permittee shall notify the developmental services division and request an inspection. If the construction is substantially complete, but not in full compliance with this article and other applicable codes, the zoning administrator or his designee shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of such inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the permit lapses, the zoning administrator may require the owner or applicant to remove the sign or obtain another permit to correct the deficiencies. 
(g)  Appeals. In the event of denial of an application for a permit, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 409 of this appendix. 
(h)  Work without permit issuance. If any person, owner, authorized agent or contractor commences any work before securing permits required by this article, fees upon application shall be doubled. 
(i)  Revocation. In the event it is determined that a permit was issued in violation of the ordinance from which this article is derived or other ordinance or law regulating the sign at issue or where the sign has been erected in violation of such standards, the zoning administrator may issue the permit holder a written notice of revocation of the permit, stating the grounds for such revocation action. The zoning administrator's decision to revoke a permit may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 409 of this appendix. 
(j)  Multiple lots. If several lots of record which are contiguous and adjacent have been combined for a single purpose, then the lots shall be considered as a single lot in determining the size, height and use requirements as set forth by this article. 
(k)  Display of permit. The permit holder shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this article. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of county officers and employees. 
(l)  Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject to any filing of such applications as the zoning administrator may require; no fees shall be charged for filing an assignment with the county. The assignment shall not require county approval. However, a modification of the sign by an assignee shall require a permit and payment of fee as for a new sign. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2204. - Signs exempt from permit. 
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article, provided that such signs or devices erected or placed are located on property of the person who erects such signs or on property whose owner has given permission for such placement, and provided further that all other standards of this article concerning the physical placement or dimensions of the sign are observed: 
(a)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid applicable law, regulation, or ordinance. 
(b)  Official traffic control signs and devices meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c)  Address numerals not exceeding four inches in height on residential properties or eight inches in height on non-residential properties. 
(d)  Incidental signs and other signs on private property directing traffic, such as "stop" or "yield," that meet state department of transportation standards. 
(e)  Signs on the same premises as the business to which they relate; provided, however, that the sign is completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building in which the business is located. 
(f)  Flags are limited to 24 square feet and, if attached to a flag pole, shall be flown on a pole not exceeding 25 feet in height in sign districts 1 and 3. Flags in sign district 2 shall not exceed 60 square feet in size nor be flown on poles higher than 40 feet. Two flags per property are permitted without permit. Additional flags are subject to permitting as "banners" under section 2207 of this section. 
(g)  Window signs are allowed in all sign districts. Window signs shall cover no more than 50 percent of any window or door pane area. 
(h)  Individual businesses are allowed one non-illuminated portable sidewalk sign of an A-frame or easel construction per public street frontage during business hours. Such signs shall be located within three feet of the entrance to the business. Such signs shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or obstruct the view of drivers entering or existing property or intersecting streets. Such signs shall further not exceed five feet in height or two feet in width and shall be removed by the owner at the end of each business day. 
(i)  Each owner and/or occupant of a lot in the county shall be allowed to erect two standard informational signs on that owner/occupant's property without first obtaining a permit. 
(j)  Political campaign signs shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
(k)  Spectacular signs or devices are allowed in sign districts 2 and 3; provided, however, that the zoning administrator may require the removal and discontinuance of any spectacular sign or device if he determines that such spectacular sign or device is endangering the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2205. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of Bulloch County: 
(a)  No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained that uses the words, "stop," "emergency," or "danger," or uses emergency colors of red, blue or amber, in such a manner as to imply danger or emergency, or which is a copy or imitation of an official traffic-control sign or device. 
(b)  No signs are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way, except for traffic signs and signals, informational signs erected by a public agency, and approved signs identifying subdivisions or commercial/industrial developments. 
(c)  Signs attached to, drawn or painted on trees, rocks, or utility poles. 
(d)  Beacons; animated signs. 
(e)  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument. 
(f)  Fluttering ribbons or pennants (excluding flags permitted under section 2204(f) or banners permitted on a temporary basis under section 2207). 
(g)  Roof signs, except on the facings of mansard roofs where the slope of the roof does not terminate in a unified ridge line, and when no other space is available for the mounting of signs. Supports for roof signs on such mansard roofs shall be attached to the structural supports of the roof, and shall not project above the peak of the roof. 
(h)  Illuminated signs from which direct rays of light are projected onto a lot other than on the lot where the illumination occurs. 
(i)  Signs displaying any obscene message or obscenity as defined by U.S. Supreme Court decisions. 
(j)  Portable signs, except as allowed under section 2204(h) of this article. 
(k)  Projecting signs. 
(l)  Suspended signs. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2206. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Existing nonconforming signs. Any permanent sign existing as of the date of the adoption of this article (April 5, 2011), which sign was legal when erected but does not comply with all the requirements of this article, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article so long as it remains in continuous use without any renovation or modification other than routine maintenance and repair. The mere changing of the advertisement or message on an existing nonconforming sign, without any structural alteration to the sign, shall not be considered a renovation or modification that results in the loss of exempt status. 
(b)  Maintenance of nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs that are exempt from the requirements of this article must nonetheless be maintained in good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated or structurally unsafe. If the zoning administrator or his designee determines that a nonconforming sign has been allowed to deteriorate to the point that it is structurally unsafe, the sign must be removed and cannot be replaced unless it is with a sign that complies with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Conforming and nonconforming signs. No conforming sign or advertising device shall be erected on a lot if the permit holder or applicant maintains an existing nonconforming sign on the lot until the nonconforming sign has been removed. 
(d)  Incentives for removal of nonconforming signs. In the event a nonconforming sign is removed and replaced with a sign in conformance with this article, the owner of the property on which the sign is placed shall be allowed a waiver of all permit fees associated with the new conforming sign. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2207. - Temporary signs and banners. 
(a)  Permits for temporary signs or banners on private property shall be allowed upon issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the application procedures required by section 2203 of this article, and the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A temporary sign permit shall be permitted for a period up to 90 days. 
(2)  No more than three permits shall be issued for a lot in any calendar year. 
(3)  The application shall specifically describe the sign and device as to construction and/or composition and location on the property. 
(4)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall adhere to the applicable standards of this article which would otherwise apply to a sign intended to be erected on a permanent basis, including but not limited to size, height, setback, placement on a building elevation, etc. 
(5)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall not include any illumination or any feature or characteristic which would also meet the definition of a changeable copy sign. 
(6)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall pose no significant threat to person or property in the event of inclement weather. 
(7)  Each temporary sign and banner shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2208. - Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs. 
(a)  Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs are permitted as an integral part of any permanent signs which meet all other requirements of this article, and further subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The changeable copy or electronic message center portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the overall display surface area of the sign. 
(2)  The total display area of any sign containing changeable copy panels shall not exceed the size limitations imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(3)  Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs will only be allowed as part of the original construction and erection of a sign which complies with the specifications required by this article or as part of a significant structural alteration to an existing sign. 
(4)  Electronic message center signs may only display static images lasting for at least eight seconds before transitioning to another static image. Transitions from one static image to the next may utilize frame effects so long as animation and flashing is prohibited. 
(5)  All electronic message center signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct correlation with natural ambient light conditions. 
(6)  No electronic message center sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area, measured as follows: 

 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2209. - Illuminated signs. 
Where internal or external illumination of signs is permitted within this article, no lighting arrangement shall impair the vision of the traveling public in any way. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2210. - Reflective surfaces. 
Sign faces shall not incorporate reflective surface materials which may obstruct, impair or interfere with the vision of the traveling public in any way. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2211. - Location, number and dimension of permitted signs. 
(a)  Sign districts. Signs of certain types, characteristics, numbers and dimensions are permitted in specific locations, and according to standards established by this section and other applicable sections of this article. For the purposes of categorizing suitable signs by location in the county, the following sign districts are established: 
(1)  Sign district 1 includes the AG-5 district and any residential district (AG-5, R-80, R-40, R-25, R-15, R-2, R-3, and MHP). 
(2)  Sign district 2 is the HC, GC, NC, PUD, HI, and LI zoning districts on state and federal highway systems, except for those specific state and federal highway segments identified and included within sign district 3. 
(3)  Sign district 3 is the HC, GC, NC, PUD, HI, and LI zoning districts on thoroughfares not part of the state or federal highway system. 
(b)  Exempt and prohibited signs. Certain signs are exempt from permit requirements pursuant to section 2204 of this article, and certain signs are prohibited pursuant to section 2205 of this article. These exempt and prohibited signs are not listed in table 1, and any exempt signs on a lot should not be included in computing the maximum sign areas in tables 2, 3, and 4. 
(c)  Type, number, and maximum area of signs. The type, number, and maximum area of signs shall be as set forth in tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 as follows: 

 
1  Roof signs, where permitted, shall be subject to the provisions of section 2205(f). 
2  Signs listed as "miscellaneous" within this table do not form part of the "aggregate sign area" for a parcel as defined in section 2202, or tables 2, 3, and 4 as provided within this article. 

 
1  Per the purposes of this article, "residences on an individual lot" refers to any individual lot principally serving as a single-family residential dwelling [attached, detached, townhouse, etc.] or a duplex. 
2  Per the purposes of this article signage related to a "residential development or subdivision" includes all common entry signage into the development, and all signage related to common areas and facilities. 
3  As provided in section 2202 and table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit except for billboards, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
4  Excludes billboards. Billboards shall be subject to the provisions of section 2212 of this article. 
5  Permit required, no fee will be charged. 
6  Unless incorporated into the street right-of-way as part of landscaped entryway feature — in which case only one sign structure may be located at the entrance. 
(NOTE: Illumination of freestanding or building signs is prohibited on any individual lot principally serving as single-family residential dwelling [attached, detached, townhouse, etc.] or a duplex. Land uses within sign district 1 which may otherwise utilize illumination shall not incorporate internal illumination.) 

 
1  As provided in section 2202 and table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit except for billboards, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
2  Excludes billboards. Billboards shall be subject to the provisions of section 2212 of this article. 

 
1  As provided in section 2202 and table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit except for billboards, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
2  Excludes billboards. Billboards shall be subject to the provisions of section 2212 of this article. 
(d)  Dimensional standards by sign district. Signs may be erected in those districts where the applicable sign type is allowed as provided within the tables 2, 3, and 4 contained in this section. The following principles shall control when computing the sign area, height and other miscellaneous provisions provided in tables 2, 3, and 4: 
(1)  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face shall be calculated by means of the smallest shape (i.e., square, circle, rectangle) that surrounds the extreme limits of writing or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework. 
(2)  Computation of area of multifaced signs. The area of a sign with more than one face shall be calculated by totaling the areas of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two faces are identical and back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, the sign shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be calculated as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. 
(4)  Computation of aggregate sign area for a lot. The aggregate sign area for a lot shall be computed by adding together the area of all permanent signs on the lot that require a permit except for billboards, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2); Amd. of 3-6-12) 
Section 2212. - Billboards. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to billboards: 
(1)  All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the right-of-way of roads in the state highway system shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit. In the event that the provisions of this article are more restrictive than the provisions of state and federal law, then this article shall prevail and control. Billboards shall be permitted only in sign district 2 as established in section 2211(a)(2) and table 3 under section 2211(c) of this article. 
(2)  No billboard shall exceed 378 square feet in sign area, excluding architectural trim and structural support, unless such sign is adjacent to the right-of-way of and visible from Interstate 16, in which case the sign shall not exceed 672 square feet in sign area. For purposes of computing sign area, only one side of a V-type or double-faced sign shall be considered. 
(3)  No more than one billboard per sign structure will be allowed to face the same direction. This provision prohibits double side-by-side or stacked signs, but allows V-type or back-to-back double-faced signs. 
(4)  Billboards shall be a minimum of ten feet above normal grade, measuring from the bottom of the sign. Billboards adjacent to and visible from Interstate 16 shall not exceed 70 feet in total height. Billboards adjacent to and visible from all other roads shall not exceed 45 feet in total height. 
(5)  All billboard structures must be designed to withstand a minimum 25 psf wind load (100 mph). Certification from an engineer licensed in the State of Georgia that the proposed sign will meet this requirement must be submitted with the permit application. 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no billboard shall be permitted to be erected within 3,000 feet of another billboard on the same side of the road as measured along a line parallel to such road; provided, however, that this distance shall be reduced to 1,500 feet if the applicant removes two existing nonconforming billboards. 
(7)  Billboards adjacent to the right-of-way of and visible from Interstate 16 shall be limited to three signs per roadway frontage per interchange quadrant with said signs being restricted to an area 1,200 feet long, beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement commences or ceases to widen at exits from or entrances to the main traveled way, as measured to accommodate the longest entrance or exit ramp. Further, such signs shall be a minimum of 500 feet apart at their nearest point. No other billboard shall be permitted adjacent to or along the right-of-way of Interstate 16. 
(8)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, billboard structures shall be set back no less than ten feet from any public right-of-way and shall maintain a minimum of 15 feet of clearance from any power lines. 
(9)  No billboard shall be located within 250 feet of any residential zoning district nor within 1,000 feet of the property line of any public or private schools, public parks, playgrounds or recreation areas, cemeteries, public forests, public buildings, or historical sites listed in the state or national register. 
(10)  All illuminated billboards shall use base mounted lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. No lighting shall impair the vision of the traveling public in any way. 
(11)  No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of the State Route 67 Bypass or the State Route 73 (U.S. Highway 301) Bypass, collectively also known as the Veterans Memorial Parkway. 
(12)  No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of any road officially designated as a scenic byway by federal, state, or local authorities. 
(13)  Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(14)  The approval for the placement of a billboard shall be void if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit within six months from the date of authorization thereof or to complete erection of the billboard within six months of obtaining a permit. 
(b)  Distances, when required by this section, shall be established by a survey performed by a surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. Said survey shall be submitted as part of the application for a sign permit. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2213. - Design, construction, and maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the Standard Building Code and National Electrical Code as adopted by the county. All signs must be designed to withstand winds of 100 miles per hour. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted in this article, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently attached to the ground, building or any other structure. 
(c)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and in compliance with all building and electrical codes. The following are some examples of deficiencies which reflect a lack of care: rust spots; loose boards; paint or lettering faded; paint chipping or peeling; lights not working or burned out; colored or transparent panels used with backlighting which are missing, broken, faded or damaged; inspection plates loose or missing; or overall sign appearance not consistent with the other signs in the general area. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2214. - Violations and enforcement; penalties and remedies. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Citations for violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the Magistrate Court of Bulloch County. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the county may seek equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to remedy any violation of this article. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
Section 2215. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  No liability. This article is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure such beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which include public safety, health, and general welfare. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the governing authority or any of its employees or agents any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property in any way caused by or connected with any signage governed by this article. Nor shall the governing authority or any of its employees or agents be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, denials, approvals, or permits conducted or issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(c)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the Bulloch County Code of Ordinances, including appendix C, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(d)  Effective date. The ordinance from which this article is derived shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(Amd. of 4-5-11(2)) 
ARTICLE 23. - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF BULLOCH COUNTY, GEORGIA (OFFICIAL MAP) 

Section 2301. - Official Zoning Map, Bulloch County, Georgia (official map). 
The Official Zoning Map, Bulloch County, Georgia is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this zoning ordinance [this appendix]. Any reference to the "official map" in this appendix refers to the Official Zoning Map, Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Section 2302. - Identification, alteration, and replacement of the official map. 
(a)  The official map shall be comprised of a set of tax maps, which together comprise the official map. Upon adoption by the board of commissioners, each tax map which is part of the official map shall be signed by the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall bear the seal of the county or that of a notary public under the following words: "This certifies that this is the official zoning map, Bulloch County, Georgia referred to in Article 23 of the Zoning Ordinance of Bulloch County, Georgia," together with the date of adoption of the ordinance (November 4, 1994). 
(b)  The official map may be amended under the procedure set forth in Section 414 of this appendix. Any amendment to the official map is an amendment to this appendix. Any amendment involving a change of a zoning district shall be entered on the official map when an amendment has been approved by the board of commissioners. The entry showing an amendment to the official map shall be placed upon the property which is the subject of the amendment and shall show the date of the amendment, the zoning file number, and the zoning district which was approved by the board of commissioners as an amendment to the official map. All entries showing amendments to the official map must be signed by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Alterations to the official map may be made only by the procedures contained in Sections 414 and 2302 of this appendix. Any unauthorized alteration of the official map by any person is a violation of this appendix. 
(d)  The official map shall be on display in the office of the zoning administrator, and is the final authority as to the current status of zoning district boundaries. 
(e)  If the official map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the board of commissioners may adopt a new official map which will replace the previous official map. The new official map is identified as such in the same manner as described above in this section. When the new official map is adopted, a notation must be made on the previous official map that it is no longer valid, indicating the date that the new official map was adopted, as a reference aid. The previous official map should be preserved, if it has not been lost or destroyed, for possible future reference. 
Section 2303. - (Reserved). 
Section 2304. - (Reserved). 
Section 2305. - Zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the exact location of the boundary of a zoning district shown on the official map, the following guidelines will be used in establishing the exact location of the boundary: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line as appearing on the official map divides a single lot that was a single lot at the time of the enactment of this appendix, the requirements for the zoning district shall extend only as far as the zoning district boundary line. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following a municipal limits or county line, the municipal limits or county line is the boundary. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following a property line or such line extended, the line or lines extended is the boundary. 
(4)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following the centerline of a stream bed, such a centerline is the boundary. 
(5)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to the centerline of a street, road, railroad, or the right-of-way of such a facility, the zoning district boundary is parallel to the line and at a distance from it as indicated by scale on the official map. 
Section 2306. - Relationship between official map and the county comprehensive plan. 
(a)  The county comprehensive plan was adopted by the board of commissioners of the county. It should provide the best possible indication of desirable land use patterns that will meet projected future demand for land uses of various types. The county comprehensive plan supplies a body of information upon which decisions on future development may be made that are guided by sound planning principles. It contains a future land use map, which shows suitable areas for various types of land uses. Zoning districts may not necessarily conform to the land use map. The county comprehensive plan and future land use map shall serve as a guide for establishing appropriate zoning districts and for amending the official map, but the board of commissioners is not bound by any proposed land use in the comprehensive plan or future land use map when adopting the official map or adopting amendments to the official map. 
(b)  The zoning districts contained on the official map carry standards which must be met by all new development and construction in the county. The arrangement of zoning districts is initially based on land use information contained in the county comprehensive plan. Although there may not necessarily be consistency between the official map and the future land use map, the future land use map should continue to be used as a guide when establishing and amending zoning districts on the official map. Such coordination helps to ensure amendments are based on defensible findings of fact as well as sound comprehensive planning principles. 
ARTICLE 24. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF VARIOUS OFFICIALS CONCERNING THIS APPENDIX 

Section 2401. - Purpose. 
This article formalizes the powers and duties of the zoning administrator, the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners, and other officials as may be appropriate where this appendix is concerned. It should also provide a convenient list of services provided by each official to aid in complying with the requirements of this appendix. 
Section 2402. - Powers and duties of the zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator, or his designee has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this appendix: 
(1)  Provide initial information about this appendix upon request. 
(2)  Advise how to contact members of the planning and zoning commission, the board of commissioners, or other officials as may be appropriate for services provided by those bodies or officials. 
(3)  Maintain official map on public display. 
(4)  Determine in which zoning district a parcel of land lies. 
(5)  Issue certificates of occupancy under procedures outlined in Section 409 of this appendix. 
(6)  Offer practical suggestions on how to comply with the requirements of this appendix. 
(7)  Maintain complete records concerning this appendix and related matters, and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(8)  Supervise all professional and clerical personnel employed in connection with the performance of the functions of the zoning administrator. 
(9)  Serve as liaison to the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(10)  Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses as well as for variances or other applicable procedures which are granted by the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(11)  Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices, in order that he may be qualified to make recommendations to the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners concerning amendments to this appendix. 
(12)  Research and make reference to the zoning ordinance in connection with each and every application received for variance or other applicable procedures and to make written recommendations to the planning and zoning commission on each such application as to whether: 
a.  The granting of such variance or other applicable procedures would result in an encroachment on existing land uses or zoning districts already established on adjoining or nearby neighborhood properties protected by the zoning ordinance from such adverse impact. 
b.  Sufficient authority exists in the zoning ordinance to allow the planning and zoning commission to grant the variance or other applicable procedures. 
(13)  Maintain all written recommendations to other officials of the county in the application file to which each pertains. 
(14)  Set offstreet parking requirements for certain land uses as necessary, according to procedures contained in the county standard for offstreet parking and service facilities (Appendix G). 
Section 2403. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
The building official has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this appendix: 
(1)  Issue, and when necessary revoke, building permits under the procedures outlined in Section 408 of this appendix. 
(2)  Maintain complete records concerning building permits, and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(3)  Supervise all professional and clerical personnel employed in connection with the performance of the functions of the building official. 
Section 2404. - Powers and duties of the planning and zoning commission. 
Appendix B details the establishment of the county planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this appendix: 
(1)  Advise the board of commissioners on applications for amendment to this appendix by examining amendment applications and providing written recommendations to the board of commissioners as specified in Section 414. 
(2)  Dispense general information about this appendix to the public upon request. 
(3)  Propose amendments to this appendix. 
(4)  Advise the board of commissioners on matters of zoning as it may deem appropriate. 
(5)  Authorize variances according to procedures specified in Section 411. 
Section 2405. - Powers and duties of the board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners have the power and duty to provide the following services related to this appendix: 
(1)  Renders official decisions on applications for conditional uses or amendments to this appendix after the planning and zoning commission has reviewed and made recommendations on the conditional uses or amendments as specified in Sections 413 and 414. 
(2)  Propose amendments to this appendix. 
(3)  Hear appeals to the decisions of the planning and zoning commission and render official decisions on them according to procedures specified in Section 410. 
(4)  Any other powers and duties as may be conferred by this appendix or any other ordinances or laws. 
ARTICLE 25. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 2501. - Adoption of this appendix. 
This appendix is adopted to amend certain provisions of the county zoning ordinance previously adopted on November 4, 1994 (the "original ordinance"). The original ordinance shall remain valid and effective in all respects, except for those provisions that are amended by this appendix [Adopted November 4, 1997]. Those provisions of the original ordinance that are amended by this appendix, as well as any other provisions of the county Code of Ordinances that are in conflict with this appendix, are hereby repealed. 
Section 2502. - Effect of repeal. 
The repeal provided for in the preceding section of this appendix shall not affect any offense, act committed or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or vested right established or accruing before the effective date of this appendix; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 2503. - Severability of provisions. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the county that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this appendix hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this appendix hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, this unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this appendix hereby adopted. 
Section 2504. - Effect of catchlines. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this appendix printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Section 2505. - Effective date. 
Those provisions of this appendix that amend the original ordinance shall be effective November 4, 1997. The effective date for those provisions of the original ordinance that have not been amended by this appendix remains November 4, 1994. 
ARTICLE 26. - STANDARDS FOR TOWERS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-4-02(2) repealed article 26, sections 2601—2611, in its entirety and replaced it with a new article 26, sections 2601—2612. Former article 26 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 1997-9, adopted May 6, 1997; Ord. No. 1997-32, adopted Oct. 7, 1997. 

Section 2601. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article shall be: 
(a)  To provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and wireless telecommunications facilities in such locations as will promote the public safety and general welfare; 
(b)  To minimize, through proper siting, screening, and design, the adverse visual effects of towers and wireless telecommunications facilities from surrounding property, residential areas, scenic roadways, and the public view. 
(c)  To promote and maximize the shared-use/co-location of new and existing towers and the use of alternative tower structures; 
(d)  To accommodate the increased demand for the development of towers and wireless telecommunications facilities; and 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2602. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in article 2 of this appendix shall apply to this article. In addition, for the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings given in this section: 
(a)  Alternative tower structures shall include, but are not limited to, man-made structures such as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles, warehouses, factories, commercial buildings, multi-family buildings, and publicly-used structures such as police and fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, and other structures that can be used for the mounting of antennas or serving the function of a tower. 
(b)  Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
(c)  Co-location/shared use shall mean the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower. 
(d)  FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(e)  FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
(f)  Guyed tower shall mean a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
(g)  Height: shall mean the vertical distance of any tower as measured from the bottom of the base of the tower at ground level to the highest point of such tower, including any antennas or other attachments. 
(h)  Lattice tower shall mean a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
(i)  Monopole tower shall mean a telecommunications tower constructed of a single pole, without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(j)  Tower shall mean a vertical structure other than an alternative tower structure on which is or can be located one or more antennas, including but not necessarily limited to guyed towers, lattice towers, and monopole towers. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2603. - Co-location or location on alternative tower structure required; exception. 
(a)  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant adequately demonstrates that neither an existing tower suitable for co-location nor a suitable alternative tower structure is available that will meet the technical requirements of the service provider (or providers) for whose use the tower is intended. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2604. - Zoning districts. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Subject to the requirements of this article, the following types of uses shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use in all zoning districts: 
(1)  The attachment of antennas and related equipment or appurtenances to an existing tower or suitable alternative tower structure shall be permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Lattice towers, monopole towers, guyed towers, and antennas and related equipment or appurtenances shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the county's governing authority or other public body corporate and politic in all zoning districts, provided a written license or lease authorizing such use has been approved by the county's governing authority or other public body corporate and politic. Towers on such publicly owned or controlled property shall be required to meet all the development standards of section 2605 with the exception of minimum lot size and minimum setback requirements. 
(b)  Conditional uses . Subject to the requirements of this article, the following types of uses shall be permitted as conditional uses upon approval of a conditional use permit by the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Lattice towers, monopole towers, and guyed towers shall be conditionally permitted as a principal or accessory use in AG-5, HC, GC, LI and HI zoning districts and shall be prohibited in all other zoning districts. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(c)  Conditional use standards and procedures. The standards and procedures for granting or denying a conditional use request in article 4 of this appendix shall be applicable to this article. In addition to the standards listed in subsection (g) of section 413, the planning and zoning commission and the board of commissioners shall also consider the following standards in granting or denying a conditional use request for a tower: 
(1)  The feasibility of co-locating the antenna(s) on an existing tower or alternative tower structure. 
(2)  The feasibility of utilizing a less visually obtrusive tower structure. 
(3)  The height of the proposed tower. 
(4)  Whether the tower has the potential to negatively impact the safety, operation, or use of existing public or private airports or airstrips. 
(5)  Compliance with the development standards of section 2605. 
(6)  Degree of visibility from the public view. 
(7)  Proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries. 
(8)  Character of the uses and structures on adjacent and nearby properties. 
(9)  Character of the proposed site, including topography and tree cover. 
(10)  Design of the tower, alternative tower structure and/or antenna with reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
(11)  Aesthetic impact of the tower on surrounding properties, residential areas, scenic roadways, and the public view. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2); Amd. Of 3-6-07) 
Section 2605. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size requirements for zoning districts shall not apply to towers. However, the site or parcel on which the tower is located shall be of sufficient size to meet the minimum setback requirements in this article. 
(b)  Minimum setback requirements. All towers shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way of Interstate 16 and a minimum of a distance equal to the height of the tower from other public rights-of-way, existing nonresidential structures designed or intended for human occupancy. With the exception of exterior property lines in the AG-5 district as provided herein, all towers shall be set back a minimum of a distance equal to the height of the tower from property lines of any adjacent property. For purposes of this provision, the boundaries of a leased parcel shall be considered the property lines of adjacent property. In HC, GC, LI and HI zoning districts, monopole towers shall be set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from any existing residential structure on the property under consideration and two times the height of the tower from any residential zoning district, while guyed towers and lattice towers shall be set back a minimum distance equal to three times the height of the tower or 500 feet, whichever is greater, from any existing residential structure and/or residential zoning district. In AG-5 zoning districts, all towers must be set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from any existing residential structure on the property under consideration and three times the height of the tower or 500 feet, whichever is greater, from exterior property lines. For purposes of this provision, the term "exterior property line" means the boundary of any parcel of property that is contiguous to and owned by a different owner than the parcel of property on which the tower is proposed to be located. Minimum setback distances shall not apply to residential structures locating in proximity to any existing guyed tower or any existing lattice tower; provided, however, that residential structures and nonresidential structures designed or intended for human occupancy shall not be allowed to locate any closer than the height of the tower to any existing tower. The setback and distance requirements in this provision shall not apply to any building related to the operation or maintenance of the tower. In the case of guyed towers the closest ground anchor shall be used for purposes of calculating setbacks from the right-of-way of Interstate 16. In all other cases the closest point of the base of the tower shall be used for purposes of calculating setbacks. 
(c)  Structural design. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) and the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), as amended from time to time. A tower must have the structural capacity to accommodate at least two other users with comparable loading requirements as the initial user. 
(d)  Maximum height. The maximum height of towers in the AG-5 district and in all residential districts shall be 199 feet, unless the applicant sufficiently proves that a higher tower is necessary to provide required coverage. The mere fact that more towers less than 200 feet in height would be required to provide the same coverage as a single tower 200 feet or greater in height shall not be sufficient, in and of itself, to prove the necessity of the higher tower. In all zoning districts in which towers are permitted as a conditional use, the height of towers may be limited to minimize visual obtrusions in granting the conditional use permit. If at any time it is determined by the FAA or any successor agency that a tower or antenna is interfering with the operation of the Statesboro Municipal Airport or with the Statesboro Municipal Airport's ability to upgrade its status (such as to an instrument landing system facility), such tower or antenna shall immediately be modified to eliminate such interference. If the tower or antenna cannot be modified to eliminate the interference, then the tower or antenna shall immediately be removed by the owner. If the owner fails to remove such tower or antenna, then the governing authority may remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense and the cost of removal shall constitute a lien upon the property on which the tower or antenna was located. 
(e)  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, or board of commissioners may review the available lighting alternatives approved by the FAA or any successor agency and require the alternative that would cause the least disturbance to surrounding property. In the absence of any special conditions or requirements imposed by the zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, or board of commissioners, towers that require lighting shall utilize an FAA-approved dual lighting system with a Fresnel lens and/or a physical reflector mounted beneath the light to minimize the visual impact of the lighting on surrounding property at ground level. 
(f)  Color and markings. Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, all towers shall be unmarked and shall have either a galvanized finished or be painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish. Where FAA marking is required, unless expressly prohibited by the FAA, the tower shall be lit with medium intensity strobe lights during the day in lieu of painting. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the zoning administrator may require the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances to be of a neutral color that is compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances as visually unobtrusive as possible. Camouflaged towers and those designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(g)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. For guyed towers, each ground anchor shall also be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height with the fence line set back at least ten feet from the ground anchor. 
(h)  Landscaping. The visual impact of towers shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped buffer area a minimum of ten feet in width shall be maintained around the exterior of the security fencing. 
(2)  The landscaped buffer area shall consist of materials of the evergreen variety sufficient to provide screening that will minimize the visual impact of the tower. 
(3)  All required landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and vitality. 
(4)  The use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be credited as appropriate toward meeting landscaping requirements. 
(5)  Camouflaged towers and those designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(6)  Applicants may submit for approval alternative landscaping plans that meet the purposes of this subsection to limit the visual impact of towers. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(i)  No Advertising. Neither the tower nor the tower site shall be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. Name plates and FCC tower registration numbers for the purpose of self-identification shall not be considered advertising. 
(j)  Federal and state requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed then-current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal or state governments with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations as mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. 
(k)  Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses. All towers operative on the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use or structure in accordance with section 403 of this appendix. Provided, however, that no later than January 1, 2003, the owners of any such pre-existing towers that are lighted shall install an FAA-approved Fresnel lens and/or a physical reflector mounted beneath the light to minimize the visual impact of the lighting on surrounding property at ground level. Additional antennas and related equipment or appurtenances may be co-located on or around pre-existing towers, provided that a permit for such co-location is obtained in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2); Amd. of 1-3-06; Amd. Of 3-6-07) 
Section 2606. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Building permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who has not made application for and obtained a building permit in accordance with this article to: 
(1)  Erect, construct in place, re-erect, or replace, any tower; 
(2)  Locate or co-locate any telecommunications facilities on or around a pre-existing tower for which a permit has not been obtained in accordance with this article; 
(3)  Locate any telecommunications facilities on an alternative tower structure; or 
(4)  Modify any existing tower (or any alternative tower structure that currently serves the function of a tower) by increasing the height thereof. 
Applications for building permits and informational submittals under this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or his designee and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Submittals. A complete application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A site plan or plans to scale specifying the proposed location and dimensions of the tower; if lighting is required, the proposed lighting system and alternative lighting systems that would meet FAA approval; size of accessory buildings or uses; access; parking; fences; landscaping plans; existing and adjacent land uses; proposed distance of the tower from existing structures, buildings, overhead utility lines, public rights-of-way, and adjacent property lines; and utilities inventory indicating the locations of all drainage, power lines and any other items as impacting the proposed tower site. The site plan shall show all public views and all features which screen public views and adjacent property views from the proposed tower. 
(2)  Visual simulations of the proposed tower or alternative tower structure illustrating the potential visual impact. The applicant shall submit visual simulations of the proposed tower or alternative tower structure that are to scale and that include all initial and future co-location antennas (including proposed coaxial cable runs for each proposed antenna). The visual simulations can consist of photo simulations or other means which accurately depict the proposed structure as it would be seen from adjacent properties and the public view, including but not necessarily limited to the nearest public roadway and the public roadway from where the structure would be most visible, if that point is not the nearest public roadway. Such visual simulations shall be accomplished by utilizing a balloon test and/or GPS coordinates in order to accurately depict the visual impact of the tower or alternative tower structure from these various locations. The applicant shall seek to obtain the consent of all adjacent property owners for purposes of going onto their property in order to accurately create the visual simulations. If such consent is granted, the applicant shall create visual simulations from the location where the proposed tower would be most visible from each habitable existing structure on the adjacent property, and up to two additional locations if specifically requested by the property owner and, if no such locations are requested, from the location from which the proposed tower or alternative tower structure would be most clearly visible. The applicant shall exercise due diligence and good faith in attempting to obtain the consent of adjacent property owners and must provide a detailed explanation of its efforts to do so if such consent is denied. 
(3)  A report from a licensed professional engineer, documenting the following: 
(A)  Tower height and design, including structural and technical engineering, and other pertinent factors governing the proposed tower design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included. 
(B)  Total anticipated structural capacity of the tower, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
(C)  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower. 
(D)  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that the site, setbacks and separation from other uses are of adequate size or distance. 
(E)  If the application is for an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances to be located or co-located on a pre-existing tower or located on an alternative tower structure, the engineer's report shall document that the pre-existing tower or alternative tower structure has the structural capacity to support the additional antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances and that the additional antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances will not overstress the pre-existing tower or alternative tower structure. 
(4)  Certification from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances: 
(A)  Comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations and guidelines governing nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). 
(B)  Are not expected to result in harmful interference to any existing or previously proposed Public Safety Telecommunications service. 
(5)  Written documentation from the FAA that the FAA has determined that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances is not identified as an obstruction and would not be a hazard to air navigation. 
(6)  Identification of the geographic service area to be served by the subject installation, including accurately scaled color radio frequency (RF) plotted maps showing coverage from all sites providing service within the county from the applicant's existing network and including the proposed site. Where the proposed site does not result in continuous coverage within the county, when coupled with other existing sites providing service, the maps shall also depict the nearest associated telecommunications facility site(s) within the network. RF maps shall also be provided which depict the proposed coverage, comparing coverage of the proposed facility with coverage from all potential co-location sites within a one-mile radius of the proposed site and containing sufficient engineering data to show that said sites would not be feasible to fill significant, required service gaps. 
(7)  If the application is for a new tower or towers, the applicant must identify all existing towers, all alternative tower structures, and all towers for which applications are currently pending which are located within the applicant's search area. This shall include, as it relates to the applicant's proposed site, a description of the distance and location of all such towers and alternative tower structures, both within and outside the applicant's network. The applicant must provide specific, detailed evidence with regard to each identified tower or alternative tower structure that it cannot accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances and that co-location is therefore not possible. Such evidence may consist of the following: 
(A)  No existing towers or alternative tower structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(B)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(C)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures do not have sufficient structural capacity to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances. 
(D)  The applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause harmful electrical interference with the antenna(s) on or near the existing towers or alternative tower structures, or the antenna(s) on or near the existing towers or alternative tower structures would cause harmful electrical interference with the applicant's proposed antenna(s). 
(E)  The addition of the applicant's proposed antennas would cause the existing tower to exceed FCC guidelines for RF exposure at or beyond the site fence. 
(F)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to utilize an existing tower or alternative tower structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative tower structure for utilization are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(G)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and alternative tower structures infeasible. 
(8)  If the application is for a new tower, the applicant must submit a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. 
(9)  The applicant shall submit a site inventory and future facilities plan to include the following: 
(A)  An inventory of all of the applicant's existing and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the county and within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, and the current users and remaining capacity of each existing tower. 
(B)  Where the RF coverage maps required by section 2606(b)(6) depict areas within the county which, with the addition of the proposed telecommunications facility remain unserved, the applicant shall include an affirmative statement that it does not intend to serve such areas or shall set forth the timeframe in which such additional area is intended to be served and the number and approximate location of proposed telecommunications site(s) that will be needed to provide service to the unserved area(s). 
(C)  Where an applicant proposes to add a telecommunications site in an area that, in a prior submission to the county had been shown as receiving service, the applicant shall fully explain why the previously depicted coverage was not obtained or proved inadequate. The applicant shall also include an affirmative statement as to what steps have been taken to ensure that the RF maps submitted with the instant proposal are of higher accuracy and shall explain, in detail, what steps have been taken to increase the accuracy of the current coverage map over the previously submitted map. 
(c)  Informational submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances or replacing existing antenna(s) on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following for information only: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity co-locating on the tower. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)  The tower's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the tower. 
(5)  Certification from a licensed professional engineer that the tower has sufficient structural capacity to accommodate the proposed additional loading without becoming over stressed. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations and guidelines governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). 
(d)  Independent expert review. In addition to any permit fees for a new tower or increase in height to an existing tower, the applicant shall be required to pay to Bulloch County an independent expert review fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per application at the time the application is filed. If the actual cost to Bulloch County for independent expert review of the application is greater than this initial fee, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Forms. The zoning administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2); Amd. of 8-2-11) 
Section 2607. - Public safety telecommunications. 
(a)  Towers erected by a governmental entity for police, fire, EMS, 911 or other similar public safety telecommunications shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Commercial telecommunications providers shall give priority to and make reasonable efforts to accommodate requests by governmental entities for tower space needed for public safety telecommunications. If such a request is denied, the commercial telecommunications provider shall reasonably demonstrate why it is not feasible to grant the request. 
(c)  If at any time it is determined that a tower or antenna owned or operated by a commercial wireless telecommunications provider is interfering with properly operating pre-existing public emergency telecommunications, such tower or antenna shall immediately be modified to eliminate such interference. If the interference cannot be eliminated through modification, then the commercial provider shall discontinue the use of and remove the tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2608. - Annual reports. 
(a)  The owners of all telecommunication towers operated within Bulloch County shall file an annual report with the office of the zoning administrator. Said report shall be filed on or before the 31st day of December each year and shall include the following: 
(1)  Certification that the telecommunications tower is currently in use, and if not in use, the date the telecommunications tower ceased being in use; 
(2)  The name, address, phone number, and contact person for the owner of the telecommunications tower; 
(3)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all current users of the telecommunications tower; and 
(4)  The remaining structural capacity of the telecommunications tower, including specific information about the number of future users comparable to the current users the tower will structurally accommodate. 
(b)  All providers of telecommunications services in Bulloch County, including but not limited to tower owners, shall file an annual update to their site inventory and future facilities plan with the zoning administrator on or before the 31st day of December of each year. 
(c)  A filing fee for each annual report shall be due at the time of filing. The fee shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Failure to pay fee by the deadline will result in the fee being doubled. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2); Amd. of 8-2-11) 
Section 2609. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months and for which there are no applications pending for permitted use of the structure at the end of such 12-month period, shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned tower and the owner of the property where the abandoned tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such tower. If such tower is not removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed three months, after receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the governing authority may remove such tower and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The governing authority may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned towers are removed. Delay by the governing authority in taking action shall not in any way waive the governing authority's right to take action. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower wishes to use such abandoned tower, the owner must first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower were a new tower. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2610. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Warnings and citations. The zoning administrator, building inspector, or their designees may issue a warning citation for a violation of this article. A warning citation shall be sent via certified or registered mail to the person or entity who is responsible for the violation. Upon receipt of the warning citation, the person or entity shall have 60 days to correct or remove such violation, unless the citing official determines that the violation is an imminent hazard to the public, in which case the citing official may shorten the period of time in which the violation must be corrected or removed. If the violation is not corrected or removed within the required time period, then the person or entity shall be issued a citation for violation of this article. 
(b)  Fines. Any violation of this article resulting in a citation shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. In no event shall the fine imposed for a violation of this article be less than $500.00. 
(c)  Continuing violation. Each day any violation of this article continues may be considered a separate offense punishable by a separate fine. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2611. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  No liability. This article is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure such beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the governing authority or any of its employees or agents any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property in any way caused by or connected with a tower, antenna, or telecommunications facility governed by this article. Nor shall the governing authority or any of its employees or agents be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, grants, denials, approvals, or permits conducted or issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(c)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the County Code of Ordinances, including appendix C, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(d)  Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2612. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all commercial providers of telecommunications, radio, broadcast, or other commercial services involving the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to persons or entities erecting towers for their own private, non-business use, unless such towers exceed 100 feet in height. 
(Ord. of 6-4-02(2)) 
Section 2613. - Global positioning satellite service tower for agricultural purposes. 
(a)  Towers used solely with Global Positioning Satellites for precision agriculture shall be exempt from the following provisions of this article: 
(1)  Section 2604(a). 
(2)  Section 2605(c) — requirement relating to "structural capacity to accommodate at least two other uses." 
(3)  Section 2605(g) — security fencing not required but tower should be made inaccessible to protect public health and safety. 
(4)  Section 2605(h)(1). 
(5)  Section 2605(h)(2) 
(6)  Section 2605(h)(3). 
(7)  Section 2605(h)(5). 
(8)  Section 2605(h)(6). 
(9)  Section 2605(k). 
(10)  Section 2606(b)(2) 
(11)  Section 2606(b)(3)b. 
(12)  Section 2606(b)(3)e. 
(13)  Section 2606(b)(6). 
(14)  Section 2606(b)(7). 
(15)  Section 2606(b)(8). 
(16)  Section 2606(b)(9). 
(17)  Section 2606(c)(6). 
(b)  Co-location of cellular services on towers built for global positioning satellite for precision agriculture shall submit an application as a new tower and must meet all requirements of this article. 
(Amd. of 10-6-08) 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A:  Subdivision Regulations [See Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances] 
Appendix B:  Resolution establishing planning and zoning commission [See Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances] 
Appendix C:  Soil and Sedimentation Control Ordinance [See Chapter 6.5 of the Code of Ordinances] 
Appendix D:  Sign Ordinance, Perimeter Road Sign Ordinance [See Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances] 
Appendix E:  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance [See Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances] 
Appendix F:  Bulloch County Clean Community Ordinance [See Chapter 8 of the Code of Ordinances] 
APPENDIX G. - STANDARD FOR OFFSTREET PARKING AND SERVICE FACILITIES 
BULLOCH COUNTY, GEORGIA 

Section 101. - Scope. 
This standard covers specifications for offstreet parking and service facilities in the county. Requirements for such facilities are specified by zoning district in the county zoning resolution. That ordinance refers the reader to this standard for specifications of required facilities. 
Section 102. - General standards for parking space design. 
(a)  Parking spaces must not be reduced: Offstreet parking spaces must not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
(b)  Drainage, construction and maintenance: All offstreet parking, loading and service areas must be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets, and must be constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant to erosion. All such areas must be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition to the extent that it does not create a nuisance. 
(c)  Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets: All offstreet parking, loading and service areas must be separated from walkways, sidewalks and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
(d)  Parking area design: Parking stalls must have a minimum width of nine and one-half feet and length of 20 feet. There must be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways must be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90 degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60 degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45 degree angle parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways must be at least 12 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 24 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
(e)  Handicap parking requirements: Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following scale: 

 
(f)  Joint parking facilities: Two or more adjacent uses of the same or different types may provide joint parking facilities as long as the number of offstreet parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements for each use. 
(g)  Pavement markings and signs: Each offstreet parking space must be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs must be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs must be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
Section 103. - Number of parking spaces required. 
Offstreet parking space must be provided and maintained as specified in the following schedule. For uses not specifically listed here, the parking requirements for the listed use most similar to the unlisted use in question, as determined by the zoning administrator, will apply. Parking requirements by use are as follows: 
(1)  Apartment or other multifamily dwelling: Two spaces for each duelling unit. 
(2)  Auditorium, stadium, assembly hall, gymnasium, theater, community recreation center or church: Of the following three standards, the one which requires the greatest number of parking spaces: 
a.  One space per four fixed seats in largest assembly room or area, or; 
b.  One space for each 40 square feet of floor area available for the accommodation of moveable seats, or combination of fixed and moveable seats, in the largest assembly room, or; 
c.  One space per each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Automobile fueling station: Two spaces (in addition to service area) for each pump and grease rack, but not less than four spaces, and one space for each two employees during the period of greatest employment, but not less than four spaces. 
(4)  Automobile sales and repair, service station, car wash: Two spaces (in addition to service area) for each pump and grease rack, but not less than four spaces—plus—one space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area of the shop or car wash. 
(5)  Bowling alley: Four spaces per alley—plus—requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(6)  Club or lodge: One space for each two employees plus one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area within the main assembly area—plus—additional spaces for other uses permitted within the premises. 
(7)  Combined uses: The total number of required parking spaces must be equal to the sum of the spaces required for each separate use established by this schedule. 
(8)  Commercial recreation area (indoor or outdoor) such as YMCA or similar use: Whichever of the following two standards is the greatest: 
a.  One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor, building or ground area, or; 
b.  One space for each four seats or facilities available for patron use. 
(9)  Dance school: One space for each employee plus one space per 150 square feet of gross floor area—plus—adequate area for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
(10)  Dwelling—single-family or two-family: One and one-half spaces for each bedroom unit. Residential driveways will satisfy this need. 
(11)  Fraternity, sorority, college dormitory: One space for each two residents plus one space for each two employees. 
(12)  Golf course: Two spaces for each hole and one space for each two employees—plus—requirements for any other use associated with the golf course. 
(13)  Hospital, personal care home, intermediate care home, nursing home: One space for each three beds plus one space for each two employees (nurses, attendants, etc.) plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor. 
(14)  Hotel: One space for each three guest rooms, suites or units plus one space for each two employees. 
(15)  Kindergarten, nursery school: One space for each employee—plus—adequate area for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
(16)  Manufacturing activity, industry, warehouse: Two spaces for each three employees on shift of greatest employment, plus one space for each vehicle used directly in the conduct of the business. 
(17)  Motel: One space for each unit plus one space for each two employees—plus—requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(18)  Office, professional building, or similar use: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each two employees. 
(19)  Personal service establishment: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area—but not less than two spaces for each employee. 
(20)  Restaurant, or place dispensing food, drink or refreshment: One space for each three seats plus one space for each two employees on shift of greatest employment. 
(21)  Retail store of any type not otherwise specified in this schedule: One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(22)  School—elementary: one space for each teacher, plus one space for each two employees and administrative personnel, plus one space for each classroom—plus—adequate area for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
(23)  School—high, trade, colleges, universities: One space for each two teachers, employees, administrative personnel, and student—plus—adequate area for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students, plus five spaces for each classroom. 
(24)  Shopping center: One space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(25)  Swimming pool, public: One space for every 200 square feet of water surface—plus—requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(26)  Wholesale establishment: One space for each employee plus sufficient space, plus one space for each vehicle used directly in the conduct of the business. 
(27)  Funeral parlors: 20 per parlor. 
Section 104. - Number of loading spaces required. 
Manufacturing, industrial, wholesale and retail operations must provide loading space as follows: 
(1)  Spaces appropriate to functions: Offstreet loading spaces must be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation or individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
(2)  Design of loading spaces: Offstreet loading spaces must be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park vehicles for loading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces must be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Ingress and egress: Ingress and egress to offstreet loading spaces must conform to curb cut requirements specified in this standard. 
Section 105. - Curb cut requirements. 
In any case in which provision for ingress and egress involves the lowering or cutting away of curbs, such a curb cut is subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Only one combined entrance and exit is allowed for any parcel of property with a frontage on any one street of less than 50 feet. No more than two combined entrances and exits are allowed for any parcel of property with a frontage on any one street of between 50 feet and 200 feet. For parcels of property having frontage on any one street of more than 200 feet, additional entrances or exists are permitted only after the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning commission that more curb cuts are needed for safety reasons, and such additional curb cuts are approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  At street intersections, curb cuts must be located at least 25 feet from the intersections of the two curb lines (or such lines extended) or at least 15 feet from the intersection of the two intersecting property lines (or such lines extended), whichever is less. 
(3)  The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street and located on one property must be at least ten feet. That distance is measured between the points at which the two curb cuts begin to deviate from the established curb line of the abutting street (in other words, between the intersections of the curb return radii and the established curb line of the abutting street). 
(4)  The minimum setback from all property lines for any driveway is two feet. 
(5)  The maximum permitted width of any driveway at the right-of-way line of the abutting street is 35 feet. 
(6)  The maximum permitted width of any curb cut, including the points at which the curb cut begins to deviate from the established curb line of the abutting street at either end of the curb cut (in other words, including the curb returns) is 50 feet. However, the zoning administrator may approve a specified larger width for a truck stop, if he determines that a larger curb cut is needed for safety reasons. 
(7)  The sum of the two curb return radii for any one curb cut must not exceed 15 feet. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 