CODE OF ORDINANCES CARROLL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted June 11, 1996 
Effective June 11, 1996 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
CARROLL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Trent North, District 1 
Lawrence Shadix, District 2 
Bobby Reid, District 3 
Dan McBrayer, District 4  Rulon Johnson, District 5  Carl Rooks, District 6  Horrie B. Duncan, Commission Chairman 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Sam D. Price 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Kim B. Jones 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
CARROLL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Marty W. Smith, Commission Chairman 
Trent T. North, Vice Chairman, District 1 
Vicki J. Anderson, District 2 
Tommy Lee, District 3 
Michelle Morgan, District 4 
Lee Powers, District 5 
George A. Chambers, District 6 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Stacey Blackmon 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Susan A. Mabry 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Carroll County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Sam Price, County Attorney, Mr. Weyman E. Rooks, III, Associate County Attorney, Mr. Roger Bickford, Code and Ordinance Enforcement Officer, and Ms. Kathy Chapman, Comptroller, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Carroll County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Carroll County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Carroll County, Georgia. 1996. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. _______ 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Carroll County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending such Code; and Providing When such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Carroll County, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 102, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 9, 1996, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so the reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 6, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective June 11, 1996. 
Passed and adopted by the board of commissioners this 11th day of June, 1996. 
Carroll County Board of Commissioners: 




ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1989 Ga. Laws, page 3546 which provides for a chairman and board of commissioners for the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code cross reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-26 et seq. 

Section 1. - Governing authority. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County to be elected and organized as hereinafter provided. There is hereby created the office of chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, and said chairman shall be a member of the commission and elected as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, hereinafter referred to as the "commission," and the chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, hereinafter referred to as the "chairman" shall constitute the governing authority of Carroll County, and the respective powers and duties of the commission and the chairman shall be as provided in this Act. 
Section 2. - The commission. 
The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County which existed on December 31, 2011, is continued in existence but on and after July 1, 2012, shall be constituted as provided in this Act. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County so continued and constituted, sometimes referred to in this Act as the 'board,' shall continue to have the powers, duties, rights, obligations, and liabilities of that board as existed immediately prior to July 1, 2012. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570; Act No. 270, § 2, 2-15-2012) 
Editor's note— 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570 superceded the provisions of former § 2. Former § 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 1989 Ga. Laws, page 3546; 1992 Ga. Laws, page 6058; and 1996 Ga. Laws, page 3601. 
Section 3. - [Composition.] 
(a)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County who are serving as such on June 30, 2012, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County shall consist of seven members, six of whom shall be elected from commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section and the member who is chairperson and who is elected at large as provided in Section 4 of this Act. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, other than the chairperson, Carroll County is divided into six commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The six commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those six numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: carrollcc-prop4-tiger2010 Plan Type: local Administrator: carroll User: bak. 
(c)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(1)  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a 'VTD' heading shall mean and describe individual B locks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Any part of Carroll County which is not included in any district described in subsection (b) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Any part of Carroll County which is described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570; Act No. 270, § 3, 2-15-2012) 
Editor's note— 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570 superceded the provisions of former § 3. Former § 3 pertained to establishment of commission, and derived from 1989 Ga. Laws, page 3546. 
Section 4. - [Membership.] 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. or any other general law applicable to that office. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that commissioner district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(c)  The member of the board who is chairperson of the board may reside anywhere within Carroll County and, if elected, must receive the number of votes cast for that office as required by general law in the entire county. The chairperson must continue to reside within the county during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(d)  The first members of the reconstituted Board of Commissioners of Carroll County from Commissioner Districts 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2002. Those members of the board elected thereto from Commissioner Districts 2, 4 and 6 in 2002 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2006, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. The first members of the reconstituted Board of Commissioners of Carroll County from Commissioner Districts 1, 3 and 5 and the chairperson shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 2004. The chairperson and those members of the board elected thereto from Commissioner Districts 1, 3 and 5 in 2004 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2008, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to the chairperson and the members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the time of the state-wide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years. The chairperson and members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(f)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 as they exist on December 31, 2011, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after July 1, 2012, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. 
(2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570; Act No. 270, § 2, 2-15-2012) 
Editor's note— 2002 Ga. Laws, page 4570 superceded the provisions of former § 4. Former § 4 pertained to the chairman, and derived from 1989 Ga. Laws, page 3546; and 1996 Ga. Laws, page 3601. 
Section 5. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies on the commission and in the office of chairman occurring by reason of death, resignation, removal from the county or from the district from which elected or for any other reason shall be filled as provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the commission or in the office of chairman when at least 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the election superintendent of Carroll County, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, shall issue the call for a special election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special election shall be held not less than 29 nor more than 45 days after the issuance of the call and shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended. If the vacancy is in the office of chairman, the members of the commission shall select one of their members to exercise the powers and duties of the chairman for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending when the successor chairman takes office for the remainder of the unexpired term following the special election provided for herein. 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 21-2-540(b) provides that "at least 29 days shall intervene between the call of a special election and the holding of same." Accordingly, the phrase "no more than 45 days" should be considered as preempted by art. 3, sec. 6, para. 4(a) of the state constitution which provides, among other things, that "no local or special law shall be enacted in any case for which provision has been made by an existing general law. …" 
(c)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of chairman when less than 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the members of the commission shall select one of their members to exercise the powers and duties of the chairman for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the commission when less than 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the remaining members of the commission shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any person appointed by the commission to fill a vacancy as provided herein shall possess the residency and other qualifications required for the office. 
Section 6. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairman and members of the commission shall subscribe to an oath before the judge of the Probate Court of Carroll County for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition the chairman shall further give a satisfactory surety bond, as determined by the judge of the Probate Court of Carroll County, and payable to the judge of the Probate Court of Carroll County and filed in the office of the judge of the Probate Court of Carroll County, in the sum of $50,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. Each member of the commission shall give like bond in the sum of $10,000.00. The costs of said bonds shall be paid from county funds. 
Section 7. - Compensation. 
(a)  The chairman shall receive an annual salary payable in equal monthly installments from funds of Carroll County. This annual salary shall be in an amount equal to the base annual salary and annual cost-of-living adjustment of the sheriff of Carroll County (as computed under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20) plus $10,000.00. The annual salary provided for in the previous sentence shall also be increased by a longevity increase of 5 percent for each four-year term of office completed by the chairman after July 1, 1989, such longevity increase to be figured and granted at the end of each four-year term if the chairman is reelected to a new term. The chairman shall also be furnished with the use of an automobile provided by the county at county expense. 
(b)  Each member of the commission other than the chairperson shall receive an annual salary of $4,800.00, payable in equal monthly installments from funds of Carroll County. On and after January 1, 2000, whenever Carroll County civil service employees receive a cost-of-living increase, the annual base salary of the commissioners shall be increased by the same percentage. 
(c)  In addition to said salaries, the chairman shall receive an expense allowance of $3,000.00 per year from county funds, and each other member of the commission shall receive an expense allowance of $1,200.00 per year from county funds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 4111; 1999 Ga. Laws, page 4464) 
Section 8. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution or ordinance entered on its minutes, policies, rules, and regulations governing all matters reserved to its jurisdiction by this Act. The commission shall exercise only those powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its function as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions or ordinances, and any power or combination of powers vested in the commission by this Act shall be subject to the limitations provided in Section 17 of this Act. The following powers are hereby vested in the commission: 
(1)  To levy taxes; 
(2)  To make appropriations; 
(3)  To fix the rates of all other charges; 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)  To authorize work to be done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)  To establish, alter, or abolish public roads, private ways, bridges, and ferries, according to law, but the chairman shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the commission for subdivisions have been met; 
(7)  To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law; 
(8)  To allow the insolvent lists for the county; 
(9)  To authorize the acceptance for the county of the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of a county; 
(10)  To regulate land use by implementing the Carroll County Future Land Use Plan and by the adoption of other planning and zoning ordinances which relate reasonably to the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare of the county and its citizens; 
(11)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; 
(12)  To fix the bonds of county officers where they are not fixed by statute; 
(13)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation the county may be given authority to enact; 
(14)  To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(15)  To call elections for the voting of bonds; 
(16)  To exercise, together with the chairman of the board of commissioners, all powers now or hereafter vested in county governing authorities by the Constitution and general laws of this state; 
(17)  To fix, levy, and assess license fees, charges, or taxes on all persons, firms, and corporations engaging in or offering to engage in any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession in the area of Carroll County, outside the incorporated limits of municipalities situated therein, except businesses which are subject to regulation by the State Public Service Commission, and to classify all such persons, firms, and corporations according to the nature, manner, and size of business conducted by such persons, firms, and corporations and to fix, levy, and assess different license fees, charges, or taxes against different classes of trades, businesses, callings, avocations, or professions. Such licenses shall be issued, annually or otherwise, and may be revoked, cancelled, or suspended after notice and a hearing, in accordance with rules prescribed by the commission. Said commission shall be further authorized to adopt ordinances and resolutions to govern and regulate all such trades, businesses, callings, avocations, or professions, not contrary to regulations prescribed by general law, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of said county and to prescribe penalties for the violation of any such ordinances and resolutions, including the operation of such businesses without the obtaining of a license or when such license is revoked or suspended. Payment of said license fees, charges, or taxes may be enforced by fi. fas. issued by the commission and levied by any officer in said county authorized by law to levy fi. fas. for taxes, assessments, fines, costs, or forfeitures due said county. The commission shall be authorized, in its discretion, to require any and all persons, firms, or corporations licensed pursuant to the authority herein granted to give a bond payable to Carroll County and conditioned to pay said county or anyone else, suing in the name of said county and for their use, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest, fraudulent, immoral, or improper conduct in the administration of the business so licensed, such bond to be fixed and approved by the commission. Such license fees, charges, or taxes shall be in addition to all other taxes or assessments heretofore or hereafter levied by said county, and all funds received from same shall be paid into the county depository as general funds of said county; 
(18)  To adopt rules regulating the operation of the commission; 
(19)  To adopt a civil service system covering county employees and employees of elected county officers pursuant to Article IX, Section I, Paragraph IV of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia; 
(20)  To take any action permitted by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  To make contributions for purely charitable public purposes; 
(22)  To authorize all contracts, except for contracts of employment, involving the expenditure of county funds in excess of $12,500.00; 
(23)  To undertake and carry out community redevelopment programs pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia; and 
(24)  To make appointments from recommendations of the chairman to independent boards, agencies, and bodies. 
(b)  In addition to the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission may adopt all such ordinances or regulations as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, for the governing and policing of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the county and for the implementation and enforcement of the powers and duties of the commission, within the classes of subjects and areas of regulation enumerated below: 
(1)  To control and regulate the operation of and running of bicycles, automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, buses, taxicabs, trucks, wagons, and any and all kinds of vehicles operated in, upon, over, and across the roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares, and public places in said county and outside the corporate limits of municipalities situated therein, whether such vehicles are propelled by hand, foot, animal, steam, electric, gasoline, or other motive power; to prescribe and fix speed limits and speed zones for all of the enumerated vehicles; to erect stop and warning signs and signals at dangerous intersections or places and at schools or other public places; to prescribe and establish lanes and directional signs, signals, and markings to control the direction or flow of traffic for all such vehicles, including limitation of travel to one direction and including markings, signals, and devices to control and regulate the manner of turning at intersections; to regulate and control, as well as to prohibit entirely, the parking, stopping, and standing of all such vehicles on or adjacent to such streets and public places; to impound such vehicles involved in violations of traffic ordinances or regulations; to restrict and limit the size and weight of all such vehicles operated on such streets and public places; to regulate and establish routes to be followed by trucks and other heavy or slow-moving vehicles; to regulate and control, by permits or otherwise, and to prohibit entirely, the times, routes, and manner of conduct of parades, motorcades, and other assemblages of all such vehicles, and public address systems or other noise-making devices on such streets and public places; to regulate and control the manner of operation of all such vehicles along, over, and across all such streets and ways so as to prohibit and prevent the careless and reckless operation of same in such manner as would be hazardous to persons or property; to regulate and control in any and all of the foregoing respects all travel by pedestrians and equestrians along, over, and across such streets, ways, and public places; and to do any and all things to provide for the safety of persons and property using such roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares, and public places and of persons and property situated adjacent thereto; and any and all things necessary or incident to accomplishment of any of the foregoing powers, including the authority to require registration of the enumerated vehicles and of their owners and to prescribe standards of mechanical safety for such vehicles and qualifications of operators thereof. To carry out all or any of the foregoing powers, the commission is hereby authorized to adopt as county ordinances all or such portions of Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., known as "The Uniform Rules of the Road," (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) as to the commission may seem appropriate and the State Court of Carroll County may punish for violations thereof by fines or imprisonment or both not to exceed the limits set forth in Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., or in subsection (c) of this section, or in the ordinance adopting same; and the commission may adopt other additional ordinances and regulations, not in conflict with Title 40 of the O.C.G.A., and prescribe punishment for violation of same not to exceed the limits set forth in subsection (c) of this section; 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations for the promotion of health and quarantine in the unincorporated area of said county, as are authorized by law or not inconsistent with general laws or regulations of the State Department of Human Resources or the Carroll County Board of Health, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. It is not the purpose or intent of this paragraph to interfere with or restrict the operation of the Carroll County Board of Health within the unincorporated area of Carroll County, but to provide for the implementation of same through the ordinances of the commission, and to promote more adequate health and quarantine provisions in said county, and to that end the commission is authorized to adopt all or any portion of the regulations of said Carroll County Board of Health, as the same may be amended from time to time, and to prescribe additional regulations not inconsistent therewith, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of any such ordinances and regulations, which penalties and punishments may be enforced and imposed by the magistrate or State Court of Carroll County or other court having jurisdiction over offenses against county ordinances. Said health and quarantine powers shall extend to and embrace the health and quarantine of animals as well as persons; 
(3)  To prevent dogs, horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, chickens, and all other animals, or any one or more kinds of such animals, from running at large in the unincorporated area of said county; to prevent the keeping of any animal or animals or to regulate the manner and numbers in which they may be kept; to take up and impound any of such animals and to punish all owners or other persons keeping animals for failure or refusal to obey any such ordinance and to fix penalties and charges to be paid for release of such impounded animals; to provide for the sale or disposition of unclaimed animals impounded; to levy and collect a tax upon dogs kept in said county and to provide for registration of dogs; and to do any and all things necessary to carry out the purposes of this paragraph for the public interest; 
(4)  To prescribe penalties and punishment for the violation of zoning ordinances, building codes (including electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning regulations), and all other lawful ordinances adopted by the commission pursuant to this or any other law in force in said county; 
(5)  To provide ordinances for the preservation and protection of county property and equipment and the administration and use of county facilities, such as parks, playgrounds, and swimming pools, by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(6)  To prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(7)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads within the unincorporated area of said county, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; and 
(8)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of idleness, loitering, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, and disturbing the peace in the unincorporated area of said county and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate such other conduct and activities within said area of Carroll County which, while not constituting an offense against the general laws of this state, is deemed by the commission to be detrimental and offensive to the peace, good order, and dignity of Carroll County and to the welfare and morals of the citizens thereof. 
(c)  The commission is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances prescribing penalties and punishment for violation of any and all ordinances adopted by the commission to carry out any of the provisions of this section or other provisions of this Act or of any other law, and to prescribe maximum penalties and punishment for violation of same, except that the same shall in no event exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  The chairman shall have the authority to exercise all of the powers set forth in this section until such time as the other members of the commission take office pursuant to the provisions of Section 3. 
Section 9. - Audits. 
The commission may have the books and the accounts of the tax commissioner, custodian of all county funds, sheriff, commissioner, and such other officers as may be necessary audited annually by a certified public accountant of this state who shall be paid from county funds. Said audit shall be filed in the office of the chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any citizen or taxpayer of said county. A summary of said audit shall be published in the official organ of Carroll County within 30 days after it shall have been completed. 
Section 10. - Vice-chairman. 
(a)  At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the commission shall elect from its membership a vice-chairman. The member serving as vice-chairman shall retain all rights, powers, and duties as a member of the commission. 
(b)  The vice-chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission, in the absence of the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
Code cross reference— Vice-chairman of the board of commissioners, § 2-7. 
Section 11. - Meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular evening meetings on the first Tuesday of each month at the county seat, unless changed by a majority vote of the commission, which meetings shall be open to the public, and may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairman, or any four members of the commission, but all members shall be notified in advance of any such additional meeting as required by law. No official action shall be taken by the commission except in a meeting which is held in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 relating to open meetings. Any five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, except that a lesser number shall be sufficient to recess or adjourn any meeting; but no official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least four members of the commission. 
Editor's note— By majority vote of the board of commissioners in a meeting on January 20, 2009, the board voted to hold a regular meeting for all business matters including zoning on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
Code cross reference— Meetings of the board of commissioners, § 2-11 et seq. 
Section 12. - Powers and duties of the chairman. 
(a)  The chairman shall have the exclusive power to supervise, direct, and control the administration of the county government. The chairman shall carry out, execute, and enforce the ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations of the commission when such ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations become effective. Members of the commission shall deal solely through the chairman in all matters concerning the operation, supervision, and administration of the various departments, offices, and agencies of the county government. No member of the commission shall directly or indirectly order, instruct, or otherwise attempt to control the actions of county personnel subject to the administrative and supervisory control of the chairman. 
(b)  The chairman shall have the power to propose changes in, consolidation of, or creation or abolishment of any departments, agencies, or offices over which the chairman exercises supervision and control. 
(c)  Subject to confirmation by the commission, the chairman shall appoint the county attorney. Within budgetary limitations, the chairman shall fix the compensation of the county attorney. The county attorney shall thereafter serve at the pleasure of the chairman and may also be discharged by the affirmative vote of at least six members of the commission. 
(d)  Subject to budgetary limitations and Carroll County merit system regulations, the chairman shall have exclusive authority to appoint, remove, and fix the compensation of all employees and officials of the county. The appointment, removal, and compensation of persons filling offices and positions created by state statutes, when not otherwise prescribed by such statutes, shall be made and fixed by the chairman within budgetary limitations. 
(e)  The chairman of the board of commissioners may, at such officer's discretion, preside at any regular or specially called meeting of the commission and may vote on all matters before the commission for a vote. The chairman may convene special meetings of the commission when deemed necessary, but all members shall be notified in advance of any such special meeting as required by law. 
(f)  The chairman may compel the attendance of members at meetings of the commission by subpoena, when deemed necessary, subject to the policy of the commission as established by its rules. 
(g)  The chairman shall have power to investigate the affairs, records, and expenditures of the various authorities, boards, councils, commissions, committees, and similar bodies or agencies, whether created by ordinance of the commission or by Acts of the General Assembly, relating to the affairs of the county and to report thereon to the commission. 
(h)  The chairman shall represent the county in intergovernmental matters and shall seek to promote and improve the government of the county and encourage the growth of the county and promote and develop the prosperity and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(i)  The chairman, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, shall prepare and submit to the commission a complete annual report on the financial affairs and activities of the county for the immediately preceding fiscal year. The annual report shall show all income from all sources, including state, county, and federal funds, and all expenditures. The chairman shall cause a summary of said annual report to be published in the official organ of Carroll County. Said publishing summary shall state that a copy of the full report is available from the office of the chairman. The chairman shall also send copies of the full report to each branch of the county library. The chairman shall also make financial reports during the year as may be required by the commission. 
(j)  The chairman shall devote full time to the duties of the office and shall have no other source of employment. 
(k)  The chairman may recommend, at any time, to the commission for its formal consideration such measures or proposals as are deemed necessary or desirable to improve the administration of the affairs of the county. 
(l)  The chairman shall issue calls for agenda items and shall prepare and publish a listing of those items and the same shall serve as the agenda for the commission unless superseded by the commission. 
Section 13. - Reserved. 
Section 14. - Budgeting; control of expenditures. 
(a)  The county will comply with O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. relating to local government budgets and audits, as well as the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  The chairman shall serve as budget officer for the county. The chairman shall submit to the board not later than the regular May meeting of each year a revenue estimate for the following year and a proposed budget governing the expenditures of all funds expected to be available to the county for the following calendar year and shall include proposed expenditures for capital outlay and public works projects. The chairman shall submit to the commission at the time the proposed budget is submitted a report containing information relating to the financial affairs of the county which is relevant to establishing the annual budget. 
(c)  At the time the proposed budget is submitted to the commission, the chairman shall cause to be published in the official organ of Carroll County a copy of the proposed budget along with the public notices required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5(e). It shall be the duty of the commission to hold a meeting at the time and place specified in the notice for the purpose of conducting such public hearing. The commission shall review the proposed budget at such public hearing and may adopt the same as submitted by the chairman or make such amendments thereto as the commission may deem necessary to maintain the county in sound financial condition. The commission may continue the hearing on the proposed budget from time to time, but the time of and the place where the hearing is continued shall be publicly announced at the previous hearing. The commission shall adopt the proposed budget as submitted or as amended by the commission as the budget for the county for the following calendar year by not later than June 30. 
(d)  The final budget adopted by the commission shall constitute the commission's appropriations of all funds for the calendar year covered by the budget. The budget may be amended during the calendar year which it covers upon the commission taking formal action for such purpose at a regular meeting of the commission. Prior to taking such action, the commission shall cause to be published in the official organ of Carroll County a notice setting forth the proposed changes in the budget and a summary of the reasons therefor. Said notice shall also state the time and place of the regular meeting of the commission at which action to amend the budget is to be taken. Said notice shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of the meeting. No increase in appropriations shall be made without provision also being made to finance such increase. 
(e)  A copy of the final budget adopted by the commission and any amendment to or revision of the budget shall be transmitted by the chairman to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Carroll County then in session. 
(f)  No expenditure of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the commission. The chairman shall enforce compliance with this requirement by all departments, offices, or agencies of the county government, including elected county officers, and to this end shall institute a system of quarterly allotments of all moneys appropriated and budgeted. 
Section 15. - Clerk. 
Subject to confirmation by the commission, the chairman is authorized to appoint a clerk of Carroll County. Any citizen of said county, other than a commissioner, shall be eligible to hold said office of clerk of said commission and shall receive a salary for his services to be fixed by the commission, which salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments. Said clerk before entering upon his duties shall give bond, with some responsible surety company authorized to do business in Georgia, as his surety, in the sum of $50,000.00, to be approved by the commission, the premium on said bond to be paid by the county, payable to the judge of the probate court of said county and his successors in office and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as such clerk and to account for any and all funds, property, or effects which may come into his hands as such clerk or otherwise, which said bond shall be filed with the judge of the probate court of said county and recorded on his minutes and may be sued on in like manner as the bond of the commissioners. He shall keep minutes of all meetings of said commission, an inventory of all properties, and such books and records as may be required of him by the commission and do such other acts and things as may be required of him by law or by the commission. 
Section 16. - Records; minutes. 
The clerk of the commission shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes wherein shall appear all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the commission, in chronological order. The minute books of the commission shall be open to public inspection at all times during the regular office hours, and certified copies of any entries therein shall be furnished by said clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as other funds, to be assessed by the commission in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
Section 17. - Limitations on powers. 
No power or combination of powers vested in the commission by Section 8 or any other provision of this Act may be exercised in any manner to amend, change, supersede, or repeal, directly or indirectly, any powers vested in the chairman by this Act. 
Section 18. - Commissioner districts. 
Editor's note— Former section 18 described the geographical areas of the districts from which members of the board of commissioners were elected as set forth in 1992 Ga. Laws, page 6592. This act was repealed because it did not meet the approval of the U.S. Attorney General in accordance with section 3 of such act. Descriptions of current election districts are on file and maintained in the office of the county election superintendent. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1968 Ga. Laws, page 2769 which created and established the West Georgia Airport Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the "West Georgia Airport Authority Act." 
Section 2. - West Georgia Airport Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the West Georgia Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the Authority of the trustee acting under the trust indenture herein provided for shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the Authority. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 3. - Membership. 
The West Georgia Airport Authority shall be composed of six members who shall be appointed by the governing authority of the Counties of Haralson and Carroll as hereinafter set out. Within thirty days after the approval of this Act, it shall be the duty of said governing authorities to appoint the membership of the Authority. The Authority shall be composed of six posts to be designated as Post No. 1, Post No. 2, Post No. 3, Post No. 4, Post No. 5, and Post No. 6. The member from Post No. 1 shall be appointed initially by the governing authority of Carroll County for a term which shall expire December 31, 1974, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint such member for a term of six years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The member from Post No. 2 shall be appointed by the governing authority of Haralson County for a term which shall expire on December 31, 1973, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint such member for a term of six years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The member from Post No. 3 shall be appointed by the governing authority of Carroll County for a term which shall expire on December 31, 1972, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint such member for a term of six years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The member from Post No. 4 shall be appointed by the governing authority of Haralson County for a term which shall expire on December 31, 1971, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint such member for a term of six years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The member from Post No. 5 shall be appointed by the governing authority of Carroll County for a term which shall expire on December 31, 1970, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint such member for a term of six years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The member from Post No. 6 shall be appointed by the governing authority of Haralson County for a term which shall expire on December 31, 1969, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, the governing authority as hereinafter set out shall appoint one member for a term of six years and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Thereafter, beginning with the appointment which expires in 1969, and beginning with Haralson County, the counties shall alternate each year in appointing the regular vacancy to be filled for such year. 
Section 4. - Meetings. 
The Authority shall hold their first regular meeting after the approval of this Act, and the first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in January. The Authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January of each year thereafter, the Authority shall elect one of its members as its Chairman and another member as Secretary-Treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of Secretary-Treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31st of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the Authority shall be compensated as determined from time to time by the governing authorities of said Counties, however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Section 5. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy on the Authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Section 6. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the "West Georgia Airport Authority" as created by the provisions of this Act. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all such facilities, including real and personal property so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports, and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the Authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable for the operation of such airports and landing fields within the perimeter of the lands now held and owned by either of said Counties. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and improving the same, the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the Authority including the proceeds from any Revenue Bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for any such project or projects. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds", "bonds", and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto, and in addition shall also mean obligations of the Authority the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating", if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 7. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority. 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable; the said Authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States Government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the Authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the Authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 21 of this Act; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of Revenue bonds or other funds of the Authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(h)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source, may impose; 
(i)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State, except the right of eminent domain; 
(k)  The Authority and the trustees acting under the trust indenture, are specifically authorized subject from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the Authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 2 and section 21 hereof; 
(l)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this Act. 
Section 8. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special funds herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the Authority from time to time, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding thirty years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereof. 
Section 9. - Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The Bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Section 10. - Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the Chairman of the Authority and attested by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the Chairman, and Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Section 11. - Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument law of the State. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Section 12. - Sale; price. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par as provided in the Revenue Bond Law unless said Revenue Bond Law be hereafter amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
Section 13. - Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
Section 14. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 15. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 16. - Conditions precedent to insurance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happenings of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of the quorum as in this Act provided. 
Section 17. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of either Haralson or Carroll Counties, or any municipality therein, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the funds hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said Counties or any municipality therein, to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Section 18. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the Authority, both real and personal, and may provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 19. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Section 20. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more of all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 21. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 22. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 23. - Validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of said Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department or agency of the United States Government, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality, shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgement of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the Authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States Government if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said West Georgia Airport Authority. 
Section 24. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Courts of Carroll County or Haralson County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in either of said courts, either of which shall have original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 25. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 26. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 27. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of the Act the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing field for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the Authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Section 28. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases or its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
Section 29. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
Section 30. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Section 31. - Liberal construction of act. 
This Act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, of Haralson County and of Carroll County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Section 32. - Eminent domain. 
Through the use and power of eminent domain, the Authority shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to condemn real property, rights of way of easement for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, any such condemnation shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of this State. 
Section 33. - Jurisdiction. 
All property, the title to which shall vest in said Authority shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the county wherein such property shall lie. 
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1979 Ga. Laws, page 4335 which established a civil service system for county employees. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code cross reference— Personnel, ch. 70. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the "Carroll County Civil Service System Act." 
Section 2. - Creation and establishment. 
(a)  From and after the passage and approval of this Act, there is hereby authorized to be created and established by the governing authority of Carroll County a civil service system of personnel administration, to be known as the Carroll County Civil Service System. The said governing authority shall be authorized to create such civil service system by appropriate resolution, which resolution shall specify the department, personnel, and offices of the county government governed by such system and the effective date of said system. 
(b)  All employees of Carroll County may be placed under said civil service system except: All elected officers, all appointed boards, members of commissions and authorities, county attorney, part-time employees, and others expressly exempt by law. 
Section 3. - Composition; membership selection; terms; succession; removal; vacancies; quorum; compensation. 
(a)  There shall be a civil service board of Carroll County composed of citizens who are freeholders of Carroll County of known sympathy to the civil service system, who are not employees of Carroll County, who have paid their taxes to date, and who have been residents of Carroll County for two years or more. 
(b)  The civil service board shall be composed of five members who shall be denominated as serving in Posts 1 through 5 and shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  Members of Posts 1 and 4 shall be selected by majority vote of the elected county officials, namely the clerk of superior court, the tax commissioner, the sheriff, the judge of the probate court, and the commissioner of Carroll County. The commissioner of Carroll County shall appoint the persons who are so elected as members of the civil service board. These members shall for purposes of this Act be known as the `county selected members' of the civil service board. 
(2)  Members to serve in Posts 2 and 5 shall be selected by the employees of Carroll County (other than the aforesaid elected officials) who are under the civil service system. Such employees shall by a majority of their number, either by ballot or by petition, select the members to serve in Posts 2 and 5 and shall submit the names of the persons so selected to the commissioner of Carroll County. The commissioner shall appoint the persons whose names are so submitted as members of the civil service board. These members shall for purposes of this Act be known as the `employee selected members' of the civil service board. 
(3)  A member to serve in Post 3 shall be selected by majority vote of the other members of the civil service board. The member so selected shall be appointed by the commissioner as a member of the civil service board. This member shall for purposes of this Act be known as the `board selected member' of the civil service board. 
(c)  For purposes of facilitating an orderly transition from the former three-member civil service board to the five-member board, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Post 1 shall as of July 1, 1986, be filled by the county selected member of the previous three-member board; and this member shall serve for a term of office to expire December 31, 1986. 
(2)  Post 2 shall as of July 1, 1986, be filled by the employee selected member of the previous three-member board; and this member shall serve for a term of office to expire December 31, 1987. 
(3)  Post 3 shall as of July 1, 1986, be filled by the board selected member of the previous three-member board; and this member shall serve for a term of office to expire December 31, 1988. 
(4)  A new member, who shall be a county selected member, shall take office on July 1, 1986, and shall serve for a term of office to expire December 31, 1989. 
(5)  A new member, who shall be an employee selected member, shall take office on July 1, 1986, and shall serve for a term of office to expire December 31, 1990. 
(d)  Successors to the members provided for in subsection (c) of this section and future successors shall serve for terms of five years. Such members shall be selected during the 90-day period next succeeding the expiration of a term of office in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. Each such member shall take office on the first day of January next following his or her selection. All members of the board shall serve until their successors are selected and qualified. 
(e)  No member of the civil service board shall have held political office or have been a salaried employee of Carroll County during the three months preceding his appointment. 
(f)  No member of the civil service board may be removed from office prior to the expiration of his term except for cause after having been granted a notice and afforded a hearing before the board of commissioners of said county. Prior to said hearing, said member shall be served by registered or certified mail addressed to his residence as shown in the files of said board of commissioners at least ten days before the date set for said hearing with written specifications of the charges against him. The five members shall, at their first meeting after July 1, 1986, and at their first meeting after January 1 of each succeeding year, designate one of their number as chairman and one as vice-chairman. 
(g)  Vacancies on the civil service board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments, except the employee selected member shall be selected by a majority of only the employees who are covered by the civil service system and who are in the full-time employ of Carroll County when and if such vacancies occur. 
(h)  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum; and the affirmative votes of three members shall be required for the approval of any matter before the board. 
(i)  Members of the civil service board shall be paid the sum of $20.00 per diem for time actually devoted to the business of the board, not exceeding 25 days in any calendar year. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, page 4596) 
Section 4. - Duty, function and responsibility; generally. 
It shall be the duty, function and responsibility of the civil service board to represent the interest of the public in the improvement of personnel administration and the selection of qualified personnel. All meetings of the civil service board shall be held in offices provided therefor by the governing authority of Carroll County or in a courtroom of the Superior Court of Carroll County. The governing authority of said county is hereby authorized to provide necessary clerical assistance to the board. Said board shall hold regular meetings at least once a month and may hold additional meetings as may be required for the proper discharge of its duties. 
Section 5. - Personnel subject to act. 
All personnel specified in the resolution adopted by the governing authority of Carroll County creating the Carroll County Civil Service System shall be subject to the full provisions of this Act and included under the jurisdiction of the Carroll County Civil Service Board. A department, for the purposes of this Act, shall mean any department so designated by the governing authority of Carroll County. 
Section 6. - Duties and functions. 
The duties and functions of the civil service board shall be as follows: 
(a)  To hold public hearings regarding proposed rules and regulations and standards of the civil service system and thereafter recommend to the governing authority of Carroll County the adoption of rules and regulations and standards effectuating the civil service system established under this Act. Such rules and regulations shall include provisions for the establishment and maintenance of job classification and compensation plans, the conduct of examinations for appointment under the civil service system, the certification of eligible persons, appointments, promotions, transfers, demotions, separations, tenure, service ratings, reinstatements, appeals, and such additional regulations as may be deemed to be in the best interest of impartial selection of efficient personnel and improvement of public administration. Such rules and regulations shall prohibit political activity by any employee covered by the civil service system or the civil service board. The rules and regulations may provide for the establishment of a register of persons eligible for appointment under the civil service system. Said rules and regulations when proposed by the civil service board as aforesaid and approved and adopted by the governing authority of Carroll County shall have the force of law and be binding upon all departments and offices of the county enumerated in the resolution creating the civil service board. 
(b)  To conduct hearings and render decisions on charges preferred against persons employed in the several departments and offices included in said civil service system; to hear and decide appeals by any employee who claims to have been improperly dismissed; and to hear and decide appeals by any employee who claims to have been aggrieved by an adverse decision concerning the terms or conditions of his or her employment, specifically including decisions involving disciplinary actions, promotions, demotions, salary, or job classification disputes; this power including the power to recommend all changes necessary to resolve any and all disputes and meritorious appeals. 
(c)  The civil service board shall keep and maintain an accurate record of minutes and shall be furnished clerical assistance by the governing authority to keep and maintain its minutes and records. 
(d)  Said board shall be authorized to make recommendations as to amendments, additions to, and changes in said rules and regulations from time to time and when said amendments, changes, or additions are adopted by the governing authority of Carroll County, said amendments shall have the force of law and be binding on all parties affected by said civil service system. 
(1986 Ga. Laws, page 4596) 
Section 7. - Dismissal of employee; appeal; decision of board. 
No employee of any department or office of the county which has been brought under the civil service system pursuant to this Act may be dismissed from employment in said department or office except for good cause and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the civil service board, as approved by the governing authority as aforesaid. Any employee who is dismissed shall have the right of appeal pursuant to the terms of the rules and regulations prescribed for appeal by the civil service board. Such appeal shall be heard at the next regular or special meeting of the civil service board after it is filed and must be heard and determined by the board within forty-five (45) days of the date said appeal is filed with the board; provided, however, that such dismissed employee must file his appeal with the board in writing within ten (10) days from the date of his dismissal and provided that this provision shall not apply to persons dismissed from any department due to curtailment in funds, reduction in staff, or abolition of the job held by such employee. The decision of the board shall be binding upon the governing authority of said county as to whether such dismissal was for proper cause. 
Section 8. - Costs of system and board borne by county. 
All costs for salaries, expenses, and supplies for the establishment and operation of the civil service system and civil service board shall be borne by the county and paid out of county funds as a cost of administration. 
ARTICLE IV. - CORONER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2924 relating to the salary and funding for the county coroner. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Abolishment of fee system of compensation. 
The present mode of compensating the Coroner of Carroll County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
Section 2. - Salary; expense allowance. 
The coroner of Carroll County shall receive an annual salary of $15,000.00, payable monthly from county funds. The coroner shall also receive an expense allowance of $100.00 per month, payable monthly from county funds under such conditions as the county governing authority may provide. 
(1976 Ga. Laws, page 3135; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 3328; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4232; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 3871; 1997 Ga. Laws, page 3716) 
Editor's note— At a meeting held June 13, 1995, the board of commissioners voted to increase the expense allowance of the coroner from $100.00 per month to $200.00 per month. At a meeting held August 8, 1995, the board of commissioners voted to supplement the salary of the coroner by increasing it to $750.00 per month. 
Section 3. - Fees. 
After the effective date of this Act, said coroner shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the coroner shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Section 4. - Expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the coroner's office shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Carroll County. 
ARTICLE V. - ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE NUMBER 911 SYSTEM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4542 relating to the county's enhanced emergency telephone number "911" system. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 30. 

Section 1. - Authorization to require telephone companies to divide maintenance fees among subscribers. 
Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(e)(1), the governing authority of Carroll County is authorized to implement and to exercise the powers conferred by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133 relating to the authority to require telephone companies to divide maintenance fees for the operation of enhanced emergency telephone number "911" systems among subscribers. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2001 Ga. Laws, page 4285 which provides for homestead exemptions from ad valorem taxes as more particularly described in the act. This replaces former Art. VI, §§ 1—6, which pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from 1992 Ga. Laws, page 6514; and 1998 Ga. Laws, page 3884. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code cross reference— Taxation, ch. 90. 

Section 1. - Exemptions. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for county purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Carroll County, including, but not limited to any ad valorem taxes for special district purposes, but not including taxes levied in fire prevention districts for fire prevention purposes and taxes to pay interest on and to retire county bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Base year" means the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which the exemption under this Act is first granted to the most recent owner of such homestead. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A., with the additional qualification that it shall include only the primary residence. 
(b)  Each resident of Carroll County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Carroll County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in an amount equal to the amount of the assessed value of that homestead that exceeds the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year immediately preceding the taxable year in which this exemption is first granted to such resident. Such exemption shall be extended to the unremarried surviving spouse at the time of the person's death so long as such unremarried surviving spouse continues to occupy the home as a residence and homestead. If any real property is removed from the homestead, the assessment in the base year shall be adjusted to reflect such removal and the exemption shall be recalculated accordingly. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent or the person's unremarried surviving spouse files an application with the tax commissioner of Carroll County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(d)  The tax commissioner of Carroll County shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section which shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(e)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper application as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person or the person's unremarried surviving spouse granted the homestead exemption under subsection (b) of this section to notify the tax commissioner of the county or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect state ad valorem taxes, county school district ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, or municipal ad valorem taxes for municipal purposes. The homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other homestead exemption applicable to county ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2003. 
(2001 Ga. Laws, page 4285) 
ARTICLE VII. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY VACANCIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1974 Ga. Laws, page 2318 which provides the method of filling vacancies in the membership of the Carroll City-County Hospital Authority. The hospital authority was created and established pursuant to a joint resolution dated November 11, 1946, by the board of commissioners of the county and the Carrollton City Council recorded in Minute Book 2, page 124 on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. As used in this article, the word "Board" refers to the Board of Directors of the Hospital Authority. 

Section 1. - Filling of vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Carroll City-County Hospital Authority for any cause, including the expiration of terms of office, shall be filled by the Board selecting a successor for the position of membership in which the vacancy occurs from a list of three persons which shall be submitted to the Board by the governing authorities of the City of Carrollton and Carroll County. 
ARTICLE IX. - WATER AUTHORITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1967 Ga. Laws, page 2861 which created the Carroll County Water Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This may be cited as the "Carroll County Water Authority Act." 
Section 2. - Creation; membership; terms; officers; quorum; compensation; rules. 
(a)  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Carroll County Water Authority which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, title and style, said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
(b)  (1)  As used in this subsection, the term "commissioner district" means the commissioner district for election of each member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County as specified in an Act creating such board, approved February 28, 1989 (1989 Ga. Laws, p. 3546), as amended, but means all of Carroll County with regard to the commissioner district of the chairperson of such board. 
(2)  The authority shall consist of seven voting members, as specified in paragraphs (3) through (8) of this subsection, and other nonvoting members as specified in paragraph (0) of this subsection. Each voting member shall be appointed by a member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County and reside in Carroll County in the commissioner district which that commissioner represents. No member of the authority may be a member of said board of commissioners. 
(3)  The terms of office of those members of the authority who were appointed by the board of commissioners of Carroll County and who reside in Commissioner Districts 5 and 6 shall expire upon the date this paragraph becomes effective in 2001 and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors shall be appointed by members of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represent Commissioner Districts 5 and 6, respectively, to serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2002, and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. 
(4)  The member of the authority who was appointed by the board of commissioners of Carroll County, who is chairperson of the authority on January 1, 2001, and who resides in Commissioner District 3 shall continue to serve out such member's term of office, which shall expire on December 31, 2001, and upon the appointment and qualification of a successor. That successor shall be appointed by the member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represents Commissioner District 3 to serve for an initial term of office which expires December 31, 2003, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. 
(5)  The member of the authority who was appointed by the board of commissioners of Carroll County and who resides in Commissioner District 2 shall continue to serve out such member's term of office, which shall expire on December 31, 2001, and upon the appointment and qualification of a successor. That successor shall be appointed by the member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represents Commissioner District 2 to serve for an initial term of office which expires December 31, 2003, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. 
(6)  The position on the authority which had previously been filled by the appointment by the board of commissioners of Carroll County and which position was vacant on February 10, 2001, shall be filled by the appointment by the commissioner of Carroll County who represents Commissioner District 1 to serve for an initial term of office which expires December 31, 2002, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. 
(7)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners of Carroll County shall appoint the seventh member to serve on the authority to serve for an initial term of office which expires December 31, 2002, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor, and the person so appointed may reside anywhere within Carroll County. 
(8)  The member of the authority who was appointed who was appointed by the board of commissioners of Carroll County and who resides in Commissioner District 3 and who is not the chairperson of the authority on January 1, 2001, shall continue to serve out such member's term of office, which shall expire on June 30, 2002, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor and until such successor takes office shall be deemed to be serving from Commissioner District 4. That successor shall be appointed by the member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represents Commissioner District 4 for an initial term of office which expires December 31, 2003, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. 
(9)  Successors to members of the authority whose initial terms of office are to expire as provided in paragraphs (3) through (8) of this subsection, and all future successors to voting members of the authority whose terms of office are to expire, shall be appointed by the member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represents the commissioner district in which that authority member was required to reside, to terms of office which begin on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of that term to serve for a term of office of two years each and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Notwithstanding the initial and other terms so established, the term of office of a voting member of the authority shall expire upon the election and qualification of a successor to that member of the board of commissioners who appointed such authority member during such commissioner's term and upon such successor's appointment of a member to the authority. 
(10)  The remaining members of the authority who were appointed by the governing authority of any political subdivision within Carroll County contracting fo the sale or purchase of water to or from the authority shall continue to serve out their terms of office and until their successors are appointed and qualified, but on and after the date this paragraph becomes effective in 2001, they shall serve as nonvoting members of the authority. The nonvoting members appointed to such positions after this paragraph becomes effective in 2001 shall serve for terms of office of two years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. If the political subdivision which appoints such a member to the authority at any time ceases to contract for the sale or purchase of water to or from the authority, that member's term of office on the authority shall automatically expire and that member's position on the authority shall be automatically abolished. 
(11)  Vacancies in the voting membership of the authority shall be filled by appointment by the member of the board of commissioners of Carroll County who represents the commissioner district in which the vacancy occurs, which appointee shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies in the nonvoting membership of the authority shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Immediately after the appointments, the members of the authority shall enter upon their duties. They shall elect from among their members a chairperson and a vice chairperson and may also elect a secretary and treasurer who need not necessarily be a member of the authority. A majority of the voting members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and duties of the authority. 
(d)  The members of the authority shall be entitled to compensation for their services, out of authority funds, at the rate of $100.00 for each meeting they attend, not to exceed a total of $1,500.00 for each member in any calendar year. 
(e)  The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government, and the authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(f)  The authority shall annually make a report, including a fiscal audit, of its activities to the grand jury for the November term of the Superior Court of Carroll County and to the board of commissioners of Carroll County. 
(2001 Ga. Laws, page 1021) 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "authority" shall mean the Carroll County Water Authority created by section 2 of this Act. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual water facilities useful and necessary for the obtaining of one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, within the territorial boundaries of Carroll County and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking; the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, individual and industrial, the treatment of such waste including the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, lagoons, without and within the territorial boundaries of Carroll County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities deemed necessary by the authority to be necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of a sanitary and storm sewer system. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expense, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue certificates as defined and provided for in the Revenue Certificate Law of Georgia (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Certificate Law and in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2368) 
Section 4. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes; and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any other lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is hereby authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the State, title to such lands to the authority upon payment to the State Treasurer for the credit of the general fund of the State of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the Governor and the Chairman of the authority; 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ, officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water and related services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations and counties for a term not exceeding fifty years; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, including the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality, including the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, may impose; 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(i)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; and 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Section 5. - Revenue bonds—Generally. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, in a sum not to exceed twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) outstanding at any one time, of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special funds herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding eight per centum (8%) per annum, payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2368; 1972 Ga. Laws, page 2655; 1995 Ga. Laws, page 3606) 
Section 6. - Same—Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Section 7. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and [the] official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority, by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds, such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Section 8. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds, issued under the provisions of this Act, shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the State. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Section 9. - Same—Sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interests of the authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at more than eight per centum (8%) per annum computed with relation to the absolute maturity of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding however, from such computation the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bond prior to maturity. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 2655) 
Section 10. - Same—Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of such deficit, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund hereinbefore provided for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
Section 11. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 12. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 13. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Section 14. - Same—Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Carroll County or any municipality located therein, or a pledge of the faith and credit of such subdivisions, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate either the said county or cities to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
Section 15. - Same—Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bond or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 16. - Same—To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 17. - Same—Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulation as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking funds shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 18. - Same—Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 19. - Same—Refunding bonds. 
The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 20. - Same—Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Carroll County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 21. - Same—Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make [the] party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the water system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality contracting with the said Carroll County Water Authority. 
Section 22. - Same—Interests of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 23. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 24. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of same to Carroll County water systems, and the various municipalities in said county and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein, but such general purpose shall not restrict the authority from selling and delivering water direct to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist water distribution systems and whether neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. 
Section 25. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls or charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls or charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of the water utility system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Section 26. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which water service and facilities shall be furnished. 
Section 27. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Section 28. - Liberal construction of the act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
ARTICLE X. - TAX COMMISSIONER; SCHOOL TAXES; COLLECTION; FEES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1996 Ga. Laws, page 4115 which set forth provisions regarding the tax commissioner and educational funds. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Remittal of education funds. 
The tax commissioner of Carroll County shall remit all educational funds collected by said officer to the board of education of Carroll County, except that 1 percent of the funds collected shall be retained by the tax commissioner and remitted to the governing authority of Carroll County to reimburse the county for the cost of collecting school taxes. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3698) 
Section 2. - Purpose of act. 
Pursuant to the specific authority of Paragraph III of Section VI of Article VIII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, it is the intention of this Act to reduce the amount authorized by subsection (a) of Code Section 48-5-404 of the O.C.G.A. as reimbursement to counties for the collection of school taxes. 
(1998 Ga. Laws, page 3698) 
ARTICLE XI. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4592 which recreated the board of elections. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Created. 
There is created in and for Carroll County the Carroll County Board of Elections which shall succeed to all the powers and duties of that board of elections established in and for counties having a population of not less than 45,000 and not more than 50,000, according to the 1970 United States decennial census or any future such census pursuant to an Act approved March 28, 1974 (Ga. L. 1974, p. 3556), as amended. The Carroll County Board of Elections so created, sometimes referred to in this Act as the "board," is empowered with the powers and duties of the election superintendent relating to the conduct of primaries and elections. 
Section 2. - Composition; appointment. 
The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of Carroll County, and shall be appointed by the judge of the superior court of the Coweta Judicial Circuit who is a resident of Carroll County, Georgia, or in the event there shall be more than one such judge, the judge of the superior court of the Coweta Judicial Circuit who is a resident of Carroll County who has served on the bench for the longest continuous period, or in the event there is no judge of the superior court of the Coweta Judicial Circuit who is a resident of Carroll County, the chief judge of the superior court of the Coweta Judicial Circuit. The judge shall make the appointments from a list of three candidates for each of the positions of membership on the board which shall be submitted to the judge by the grand jury of Carroll County which convenes immediately prior to the expiration of the respective term of office. In appointing members to the board, the judge of the superior court shall make appointments so that there shall be at all times on the board a representative of each of the political parties or bodies whose candidate for Governor in the immediately preceding gubernatorial election received the two largest number of votes for the office of Governor. 
Section 3. - Initial members; successors. 
(a)  The initial members of the Carroll County Board of Elections created by this Act shall be those persons who are serving on the effective date of this Act as members of the board of elections which was created in and for counties having a population of not less than 45,000 and not more than 50,000, according to the 1970 United States decennial census or any future such census pursuant to an Act approved March 28, 1974 (Ga. L. 1974, p. 3556), as amended. Each such member shall serve the term for which appointed under said 1974 Act. 
(b)  Successors and future successors shall be appointed in the manner described in Section 2 of this Act and shall serve for terms of office of five years each and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
Section 4. - Election of chairperson. 
The board shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson for a term of two years. 
Section 5. - Compensation. 
Compensation for the chairperson and members of the board shall be such as may be fixed by the governing authority of Carroll County. 
Section 6. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  It shall succeed to and exercise all of the duties granted to and incumbent upon the election superintendent of Carroll County pursuant to the provisions of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended, and any other provision of law; 
(2)  It shall formulate, adopt, and promulgate rules and regulations consistent with law and with the rules and regulations of the state executive committee of each political party governing the conduct of primaries to the end that, insofar as practicable, all primaries shall be uniformly conducted by the board, poll workers shall be properly trained, and voters shall be adequately informed and instructed. Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee under the provisions of Code Section 21-2-111 of the O.C.G.A., relating to the conduct of primaries, shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of the board; and 
(3)  It shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections, and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
Section 7. - Organization; rules and regulations. 
The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall be in conflict with any other provision of law. 
Section 8. - Authorization to expend public funds. 
With the consent of the governing authority of Carroll County, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of distributing sample ballots, voter information booklets, and other material designed to inform and instruct adequately electors of the county with regard to elections. 
Section 9. - Offices; assistants and other employees. 
The governing authority of Carroll County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices and with such clerical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. 
Section 10. - Enactment authority. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. to create boards of election and registration by local Act. 
Section 11. - Submission of Act to U.S. Attorney General. 
It shall be the duty of the governing authority of Carroll County to require the attorney therefor to submit this Act, pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, to the United States Attorney General for approval. 
ARTICLE XII. - SALES TAX FOR EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES; DISTRIBUTION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2007 Ga. Laws, page 3501 which set forth provisions regarding the sales tax for educational purposes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Distribution of proceeds of sales tax. 
The net proceeds of the sales tax for educational purposes imposed in Carroll County pursuant to the election to be held on March 20, 2007, under the authority of Article VIII, Section VI, Paragraph IV of the Constitution shall be distributed as provided in this Act between the Carroll County School System and the independent school districts, or portion thereof, located in Carroll County. The Georgia Department of Revenue shall distribute the net proceeds of such tax to such school districts on the following basis: City of Bremen School System, 3.95 percent of the total net proceeds; City of Carrollton School System, 20.75 percent of the total net proceeds; and Carroll County School System, 75.30 percent of the total net proceeds. Each installment of the net proceeds for any period of collection shall be distributed by the Department of Revenue to the three school systems, with each system receiving its pro rata share according to the foregoing formula. 
Section 2. - Enactment authority. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to the specific authority provided for in Article VIII, Section VI, Paragraph IV(g) of the Constitution. 
Section 3. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FAMILY CONNECTION AUTHORITY[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1998 Ga. Laws, page 4348 which created the Family Connection Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Creation. 
(a)  There is created the Carroll County Family Connection Authority. The authority shall be composed of 28 members as follows: 
(1)  Three members shall be appointed by the Carroll County legislative delegation to serve for an initial term of two years, one of which shall be from each of the following fields or professions: legislative, media, and child advocacy groups; 
(2)  Two members shall be appointed by the judge of the Juvenile Court of Carroll County to serve for an initial term of one year, which members shall be selected from the fields of education, religion, community development, or social work; 
(3)  Two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, which members shall be one of the commissioners from said board or a designee of the board and one consumer of family services at large who shall each serve for an initial term of two years; 
(4)  One member shall be appointed by each of the governing authorities of the following Carroll County cities: Bowdon, Carrollton, Mount Zion, Roopville, Temple, Villa Rica, and Whitesburg who shall each serve for an initial term of one year; 
(5)  One member shall be appointed by the Carroll County Chamber of Commerce who shall represent business or civic interests and who shall serve for an initial term of one year; 
(6)  One member shall be appointed by the Carroll County Board of Health who shall serve for an initial term of one year; 
(7)  The district medical director of District 4 of the Department of Human Resources Public Health Division, the judge of the Juvenile Court of Carroll County, the director of the Carroll County Department of Family and Children Services, the director of the Carrollton Housing Authority, the director of the Villa Rica Housing Authority, the director of the Bowdon Housing Authority, the superintendent of the Carrollton School System, the superintendent of the Carroll County School System, the president of the State University of West Georgia, and the president of the Carroll Technical Institute; 
(8)  One attorney to be appointed by the Carroll County Bar Association who shall serve for an initial term of two years; and 
(9)  One member who shall be appointed by the board of the Carroll County Emergency Shelter and who shall serve an initial term of two years. 
(b)  Following the initial terms of office, all appointments shall be made for a term of two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the authority shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(c)  All appointments to the authority shall be made within 30 days after the effective date of this Act. All persons appointed to serve on the Carroll County Family Connection Authority shall be Carroll County residents except those persons filling the professional positions outlined within this Act who may or may not be county residents. 
Section 2. - Duties. 
The authority shall undertake annual and ongoing studies of the needs, issues, and state of the well-being of children, families, and youth in Carroll County. The authority shall gather, publicize, and disseminate data on issues pertinent to families and children; identify outstanding issues and areas of concern and assist the community in establishing the implementing strategic and annual plans for addressing these issues collaboratively; design and propose comprehensive programmatic strategies for addressing conditions of families and children; secure and expand funds for implementing priority strategies; and identify, coordinate, and enhance integration of existing resources to improve results for families and children. The authority shall adopt such rules or procedures as it finds necessary or desirable for the governance of its operation. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation. 
Section 3. - Authorization of funding. 
The authority is authorized to receive, accept, and expend funds from public or private sources for implementing strategies to benefit the children and families of Carroll County. The authority is authorized to expend such funds to employ a coordinator, who shall not be a member of the authority, for the execution of the authority's duties. The salary and administrative sponsorship for such coordinator shall be set by the authority. 
Section 4. - Annual report. 
The authority shall make an annual report on July 1 of each year of its findings and recommendations to the Carroll County legislative delegation, the judge of the Juvenile Court of Carroll County, the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, the governing authority of each municipality in Carroll County, the Carroll County Chamber of Commerce, the director of the Carroll County Department of Family and Children Services, the Board of Health, and to any individual or group providing funds to the authority. 
Section 5. - Oath. 
Each member of the authority shall be given the following oath to be administered by the senior judge of the Superior Court of Carroll County: 
"Recognizing the fact that there are many social, economic, and educational issues that prevent our children and their families from achieving their potential and desiring to play a part in improving the outcomes for families and children, I _______, do solemnly swear that, as a member of the Carroll County Family Connection Authority, I will fulfill the duties and responsibilities of my appointment to the best of my ability." 
Section 6. - Meetings; executive committee. 
The entire authority shall meet at least quarterly. There shall be a five-member executive committee elected by the authority on an annual basis. The executive committee shall be headed by a chair and vice chain. The executive committee shall act for the authority on routine matters and shall meet at least monthly and report its recommendations and actions to the entire authority. The authority coordinator shall act as facilitator and recorder for all meetings. 
Section 7. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. This Act shall be reviewed every third year for the purpose of assessing benchmark improvements and conditions for families and children in Carroll County. This Act shall be repealed, unless extended by legislative action, six years from the effective date of this Act. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances and resolutions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, Carroll County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county board of commissioners: 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Carroll County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioners. The term "commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Carroll County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The word "county" means Carroll County, Georgia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing body. The words "governing body" means the board of commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The word "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land, real estate. The words "land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The initials "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "chairman of the board of commissioners," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of Carroll County, Georgia, and their authorized agents, assistants and representatives. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" extends and is applied to associations, societies, clubs, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The words "public place" include any place where the public is invited to go or congregate. 
Real property. The words "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges, as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" means and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6; official names of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of repeal of ordinance or resolution. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance or resolution repealed. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(11)  Any ordinance creating an airport authority. 
(12)  Any ordinance creating a library board. 
Sec. 1-5. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances and resolutions. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections; notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included in this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances or resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(c)  The enactment of a resolution or ordinance, in the absence of language to the contrary, shall not repeal any resolution or ordinance theretofore passed dealing with the same matter, except where in direct conflict therewith. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  On or before January 15 of each year, the county clerk shall prepare a compilation of all resolutions, ordinances or other provisions enacted during the previous year which may amend, repeal, modify or supplement provisions of the county Code. 
(b)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on at least an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners of the county during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(c)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(d)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners of the county, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners of the county that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
Sec. 1-14. - Additional penalties; jail fund; depositing of money in funds. 
(a)  In every case in which any court in this county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract as provided for in this section, shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a county or municipal ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a county or municipal ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any court of this county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract as provided for in this section, shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(c)  The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund, by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia, or by any other provision of law. 
(d)  The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of each month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(e)  All such sums collected and paid over to the board of county commissioners shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the "county jail fund." 
(f)  All moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(g)  The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any municipality located in the county, unless the municipality and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution, or detention facility by municipal prisoners. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Code and ordinance enforcement officer, § 54-31 et seq.; personnel, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipal corporations and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; all books, papers and other office property subject to inspection by citizens during office hours, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Records management plan. 
The board of commissioners authorizes and adopts the following records management plan; that the records manager is hereby designated as the coordinator of the records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the board of commissioners in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act; and records retention schedules approved by the board of commissioners shall be documented in the record of the governing body deliberations; and 
Records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules; and 
No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a state records committee approved retention schedule. 
(Res. of 11-26-96) 
Sec. 2-2. - Agents designated. 
The board of commissioners shall designate the code enforcement director as the chief agent, and the persons assigned and fulfilling the positions thereunder as code enforcement officers, manufactured home inspectors, building inspectors and animal control officers as agents for the purposes of completing, signing, issuing and serving citations as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq. 
(Res. of 7-13-99) 
Sec. 2-3. - Permanent courthouse annex and satellite courtroom established. 
The Board of Commissioners hereby designates, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-17, the new Carroll County Court House located at 311 Newnan Street, Carrollton, Georgia as the regular county site or courthouse for superior and state courts effective February 1, 2012. In addition, the board of commissioners designates the new Carroll County Court House as the regular county site for its juvenile and probate courts. Finally, the board of commissioners designates the Quick Start Building, Independence Drive, Carrollton, Georgia as the regular county site for its Magistrate Court. 
The board of commissioners hereby designates, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-18, the following additional alternative facilities as permanent satellite courtrooms: 
(1)  Jack T. Bell Detention Center Courtroom  1000 Newnan Road  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(2)  Historic Carroll County Court House  323 Newnan Street  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(3)  Quick Start Building  Independence Drive  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(4)  OLD Commission Chambers  David Perry County Administrative Building  423 College Street  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(5)  Room 501  David Perry County Administrative Building  423 College Street  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(6)  City of Carrollton Municipal Courtroom  115 West Center Street  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
(7)  Carrollton Cultural Arts Center  251 Alabama Street  Carrollton, Georgia 30117 
The judges of the superior, state, juvenile, probate and magistrate courts may hold sessions of superior, state, juvenile and probate courts and conduct all other business at the permanent satellite courtroom facilities or at the regular county site or court house located at 311 Newnan Street, Carrollton, Georgia. All actions taken by a superior court judge at the Jack T. Bell Detention Center Courtroom shall be fully valid and binding as though taken and performed at the courthouse located in the new Carroll County Court House on Newnan Street in Carrollton. 
(Ord. of 7-10-01, § 1; Res. of 6-19-07, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 11-1-11, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Chairman of board of commissioners—Authority to distribute, sell and license access to the geographic information system. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby authorizes the chairman to distribute, sell, and license access to the geographic information system through a contract as provided under O.C.G.A. § 50-29-2. The board of commissioners further authorizes the chairman to execute a contract with any person to accomplish the purpose set forth in the preceding sentence. The contract shall be in substantially the form attached to the resolution from which this section is derived as exhibit A, subject to such minor changes, insertions or deletions as the chairman of the board of commissioners may approve. Further, the board of commissioners hereby authorizes the chairman to share GIS data with non-profit entities and other public agencies that he deems, in his discretion, will provide sufficient benefits to the citizens of the county. Furthermore, the board of commissioners hereby authorizes the chief appraiser, as supervisor of the geographic information system and special designee of the chairman for this purpose, to execute the contract with such minor changes, insertions or deletions, and otherwise to perform all acts necessary to accomplish the intent of this section. 
(b)  The board of commissioners finds that it is necessary to establish a reasonable fee structure to defray the cost of the actual development cost of creating or providing and updating the geographic information system. Based upon the recommendation of the chief appraiser, the board of commissioners hereby establishes the fee schedule as set forth in exhibit B attached to the resolution from which this section is derived. 
(Res. of 10-7-03, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Res. of Oct. 7, 2003, §§ 1, 2, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 2-4 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-5. - Adoption of county Title VI plan. 
The board of commissioners hereby ordains the county Title VI plan as shown in Exhibit "1" to a resolution of September 4, 2012, be adopted. The action shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the plan took effect, nor shall the plan affect any punishment, penalty, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of adoption. The chairman or his designee shall have authority to update and maintain the plan accordingly. 
(Res. of 9-4-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "1" referenced above is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-5.1. - Adoption of county ADA transition plan. 
The board of commissioners hereby ordains the county ADA transition plan as shown in Exhibit "2" to a resolution of September 4, 2012, be adopted. The action shall not revive any ordinances or resolutions in force before or at the time the plan took effect, nor shall the plan affect any punishment, penalty, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of adoption. The chairman or his designee shall have authority to update and maintain the plan accordingly. 
(Res. of 9-4-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "2" referenced above is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Service of complaints or orders, § 18-65. 
Sec. 2-5.2. - Lease of county property. 
It is the desire of the board of commissioners to set forth a policy regarding the lease of any county property as follows: 
(1)  The county from time to time may have building or land space which would benefit the public by leasing the same to an outside entity. It shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that any lease agreement for any county building or land space be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners whether for monetary remuneration or other consideration. 
(2)  It shall further be the policy of the board of commissioners that any lease of any county property should be a net gain to the county tax payers and should be set forth in writing with its terms and conditions approved by the county attorney prior to presentation of the same to the board of commissioners for consideration. 
(3)  Finally, it shall be the policy of the board of commissioners that the county clerk maintain a master list of such leases and that the board of commissioners review its leases on an annual basis prior to any renewals. 
(Policy of 5-7-13) 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Related laws reference— Board of commissioners, art. I. 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 1, par 1; home rule for counties, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; board of commissioners authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county officers; election; term; compensation, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-6. - Chairman. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meeting in a fair manner. The chairman shall have the right to vote, the same as with the other commissioners. 
Sec. 2-7. - Vice-chairman. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall select a vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairman shall preside at meetings of the commission in the absence of the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  If the chairman and the vice-chairman are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the chairman or vice-chairman is present at the meeting. 
Related laws reference— Vice-chairman of the board of commissioners, art. I, § 10. 
Sec. 2-8. - Committees. 
The chairman, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties may be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of a majority of the board. The chairman may serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
Sec. 2-9. - Official record of board of commissioners. 
The official record of the board of commissioners meetings shall consist of the written meeting minutes voted on and accepted by the commission. After official acceptance of the written minutes, all other written minute material shall be destroyed. Official video/audio recordings of the meetings shall be archived on the county's website for five years. The official written and accepted minutes shall be maintained in perpetuity. Executive session minutes shall be maintained separately as required by law and are not subject to public disclosure except as provided by law. 
(Res. of 3-5-13) 
Sec. 2-10. - Fees charged by various county departments. 
Pursuant to the county's Charter Article I, § 8(a)(3), the board of commissioners has the power and duty "to fix the rates of all other charges." Accordingly, it is the desire of the board of commissioners to set forth a policy regarding the establishment and review of fees charged by various departments within county government as follows: 
(1)  Each year as part of the budget process, any department which charges a fee for any service will include a separate fee schedule identifying the service and corresponding fee to be charged with its budget requests. When the board of commissioners approves the budget each year, it will also approve a fee schedule for such departments as part of its budget resolution establishing the fees for the various departments. 
(2)  Once the fee schedule has been set by the board of commissioners during the budget process, the fees may not be increased or decreased without the approval of the board of commissioners. Following the approval of the fee schedules, the county clerk shall publish such fee schedules on the county's website and each department charging any fees will maintain and make such schedules available to the public. 
(Policy of 5-7-13) 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Related laws reference— Meetings of the county board of commissioners, art. I, § 11. 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-11. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
Sec. 2-12. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday of each month, for all business matters including zoning. Work sessions may be held in conjunction with any regular meeting; provided, however, such work sessions shall be open to the public and all requirements of the open meetings act shall be met. All regular meetings shall be held in the county seat in meeting room A of the county courthouse annex. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(Ord. of 7-10-01; Res. of 1-20-09) 
Sec. 2-13. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting of the board of commissioners may be cancelled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county seat by the chairman for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of four commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority. 
Sec. 2-14. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board of commissioners may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
Sec. 2-15. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the board of commissioners may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session are not required, but may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners at the direction of the chairman or by a majority vote of the commission. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
Sec. 2-16. - Quorum. 
Any five members of the board of commissioners then in office shall constitute a quorum. A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. It is the duty of the chairman to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairman if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairman with the approval of the commissioners present. 
Sec. 2-17. - Majority vote. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of at least four members of the board of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. 
Sec. 2-18. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
Sec. 2-19. - Agenda. 
(a)  Preparation. The county clerk, with the advice of the chairman and the board of commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session may be held to finalize the agenda and the chairman and all commissioners may participate in said work session. The proposed agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least 72 hours before every board meeting. 
(b)  Items requested by public. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the county clerk and received at least five days before the meeting, inclusive of the date of the meeting. 
(c)  Approval; order of subjects. The agenda shall be approved by the board of commissioners as its first order of business. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. 
Sec. 2-20. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  Generally. A consent agenda may be prepared by the county clerk for the board of commissioners to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  Objections. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairman or his designee shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairman shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. 
(c)  Approval. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairman will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
Sec. 2-21. - Minutes. 
(a)  Recording; contents. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(b)  Approval. The board of commissioners must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least 72 hours before the next regularly scheduled meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-22. - Order of business. 
All regular meetings of the board of commissioners should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Minutes. 
(3)  Approve agenda. 
(4)  Invited guests. 
(5)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(6)  Consent agenda. 
(7)  Old business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Public comments. 
(10)  Adjournment. 
Sec. 2-23. - Decorum. 
(a)  Standards. All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. In order to control the proper flow of debate, a commissioner shall not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  Enforcement. The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or he can allow the board of commissioners to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
Sec. 2-24. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county clerk before the board meeting. These individuals will be allotted three minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. With the exception of zoning related matters, members of the public may speak for three minutes and may only speak once. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the board. 
(3)  Zoning related matters. Applicants or their representatives requesting rezoning and those speaking in favor of the request for rezoning shall be limited to ten minutes to present their applications. Those speaking in opposition to the request for rezoning shall also be limited to ten minutes. Applicants or their representatives shall then have two minutes in rebuttal. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
(4)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
(5)  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
Sec. 2-25. - Amendments to rules of order. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county clerk three business days before a regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a majority vote of the board to be adopted. 
Sec. 2-26. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Rules governing quorum (section 2-16), voting methods and requirements (section 2-34 and section 2-36) and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
Sec. 2-27. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. The chairman shall have the right to determine where sound and/or visual recording devices shall be located within the meeting room. 
Secs. 2-28—2-30. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Parliamentary Procedure 

Sec. 2-31. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney or his designee shall serve as the parliamentarian for board of commissioners meetings. 
Sec. 2-32. - Main motion. 
In order for the board of commissioners to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the commissioner seconding the motion to support the motion. A commissioner may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the board has voted on that motion. 
Sec. 2-33. - Debate. 
(a)  Management by chairman. After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the board of commissioners shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairman in a manner that is fair to all members of the board. Commissioners can participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairman. 
(b)  Subsidiary motions. During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the board take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: Debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions shall consist of the following motions: (1) to postpone indefinitely, (2) to amend, (3) to refer to committee, and (4) to postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: (1) to limit debate, (2) to immediate vote, and (3) to lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. (See definitions of these motions contained in section 2-36, entitled "subsidiary motions.") 
(c)  Privileged motions. Commissioners may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. (See definitions of these motions contained in section 2-37, entitled "privileged motions.") 
Sec. 2-34. - Voting procedure. 
Voting on the debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections, then the chair can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the chairman calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the board of commissioners may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a majority vote, the debate will stop. The chairman shall then direct the clerk to read the proposed motion to the board and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The chairman shall read the proposed motion to the board and then call for the vote. 
Sec. 2-35. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)  Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the board of commissioners returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)  A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list. 
(1)  Lowest rank: Main motion. 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.  Postpone indefinitely. 
b.  Amend. 
c.  Refer to committee (commit). 
d.  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.  Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.  Immediate vote (previous question). 
c.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily in same meeting). 
(4)  Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.  Questions of privilege. 
b.  Recess. 
(5)  Highest rank: Adjourn. 
Sec. 2-36. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce motions that propose that the board of commissioners take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions, and they allow a board to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions, amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also can apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered by the board, that commissioner may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely can be debated but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a commissioner believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. A motion cannot be amended more than two (2) times. Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. A majority vote is required for the board to adopt an amendment. If the amendment is adopted, then the board shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a commissioner believes that further information is needed before the board can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the board. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the chairman will bring the original motion back to the board for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend times of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the commissioner who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a majority vote is required. 
(6)  Immediate vote (previous question). If a commissioner believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the commissioner can move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of majority of the board is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the board during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-37. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a commissioner or of the board of commissioners as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a commissioner must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-38. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow commissioners to exert their rights as a member of the board of commissioners. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a commissioner disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that commissioner may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the board. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The board may then debate the appeal. The board shall decide by the majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a commissioner has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to given an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the board. The motion takes precedence over all motions except privilege motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a commissioner believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the board to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request of information). If a commissioner has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask for a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
Sec. 2-39. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three motions allow the board of commissioners to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the board. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the board to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the board to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any commissioner can make a motion to reconsider and any commissioner may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the board is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the board will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the board overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any commissioner. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the commissioner seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-36. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is not seconded, then the board shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the board to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Secs. 2-40—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Related laws references— Airport authority, art. II; hospital authority vacancies, art. VII; McIntosh Reserve Historical Authority, art. VIII; water authority, art. IX. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Appointments to additional boards and authorities enumerated. 
In addition to the authorities and commissions created pursuant to sections 2-57, 2-71, 2-86, of the Code of Ordinances and articles II, VIII and IX of the Related Laws, the board of commissioners makes one or more appointments to the following authorities, boards and commissions: 
(1)  Carroll County Health Board; 
(2)  Community Development Appeals Board of Carroll County; 
(3)  Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Center; 
(4)  Carroll County Civil Service Board; 
(5)  Carroll County Library Board; 
(6)  Carrollton Payroll Development Authority; 
(7)  Carroll County Tax Assessor's Board; 
(8)  Carroll County Board of Equalization; 
(9)  Carroll County 911 User Board; 
(10)  Carroll County 911 Policy Board; 
(11)  Carroll County Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(12)  Carroll County Solid Waste Management Authority; 
(13)  Carroll County Water Authority; 
(14)  Carroll County Board of Family and Children Services; 
(15)  Carroll County Board of Health; 
(16)  Carroll County Cemetery and Burial Ground Oversight Committee; 
(17)  Carroll County Employee Sick Leave Council; 
(18)  Carroll County Family Connection Authority; 
(19)  Carroll County Land Use Enforcement Board; 
(20)  Joint Development Authority of Carroll County, Haralson County, Heard County and Polk County; 
(21)  Pathways Center Community Service Board; 
(22)  Region 1 Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Board; [5] 
(23)  Region 4 EMS Council; 
(24)  West Carrollton Enterprise Zone Coordinating Committee. 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The state has redestricted, thus changing the region number from 2 to 1. The number has been changed to reflect the redistricting at the direction of the county. 

Secs. 2-47—2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution of September 27, 1994, §§ 1—4, in effect repealing former div. 2, §§ 2-56—2-60, and added a new div. 2. Former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of May 2, 1972; and resolutions of July 17, 1987 and November 23, 1993. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-56. - Activation of the authority. 
It is hereby declared that there is a need for a joint development authority to function in Carroll County, Haralson County, Heard County, Polk County, Troup County, Douglas County and Paulding County. Such authority, to be known as the "Joint Development Authority of Carroll County, Haralson County, Heard County, Polk County, Troup County, Douglas County and Paulding County," is hereby created and activated. Said authority, herein called the authority, shall transact business pursuant to , and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of, the Development Authorities Law, codified in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 62, as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(Res. of 9-27-94, § 1; Res. of 12-4-01, § 1; Res. of 10-6-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-57. - Joint authority. 
The authority is created and activated by this proper resolution of the governing bodies of Carroll County, Haralson County, Heard County and Polk County as a joint authority pursuant to the provisions of Ga. L. 1981, p. 1419 and O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. of 9-27-94, § 2) 
Sec. 2-58. - Directors. 
(a)  The number of members of the authority shall be 15. 
(1)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Carroll County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Carroll County as their terms expire. 
(2)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Haralson County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Haralson County as there terms expire. 
(3)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Heard County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Heard County as their terms expire. 
(4)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Polk County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Polk County as their terms expire. 
(5)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Troup County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Troup County as their terms expire. 
(6)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Douglas County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Douglas County as their terms expire. 
(7)  Two members shall be taxpayers residing in Paulding County and shall be appointed initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, by the board of commissioners of Paulding County as their terms expire. The fifteen member of the authority shall be appointed for an initial term of two years by the first governing body to approve this joint resolution, and shall be appointed thereafter at the expiration of each two-year term by the governing body next succeeding the governing body previously appointing such director. 
(b)  After expiration of the initial terms, the terms of office of all members shall be terms of two years. Successors to the persons listed above shall be appointed by the governing bodies of Carroll County, Haralson County, Heard County, Polk County, Troup County, Douglas County and Paulding County as applicable. If at the end of any term of any member, a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(Res. of 9-27-94, § 3; Res. of 12-4-01, § 3; Res. of 10-6-09, § 3) 
Sec. 2-59. - Officers. 
The directors shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may, but need not be, a director. 
(Res. of 9-27-94, § 4) 
Secs. 2-60—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLANNING COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— The Comprehensive Land Use Planning Commission of Carroll County as created in this division and the Carrollton/Carroll County Planning and Zoning Commission created pursuant to the ordinance adopted February 12, 1987 are separate and distinct entities. 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Creation; membership; terms; vacancies; compensation; residency requirement. 
(a)  There is hereby created the "Comprehensive Land Use Planning Commission of Carroll County," referred to in this division as the comprehensive land use planning commission. The comprehensive land use planning commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for an initial term of six months. Any vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointments. 
(b)  Members shall serve without pay but shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the comprehensive land use planning commission. The nine members appointed shall be residents and citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 2-12-87, § 1) 
Sec. 2-72. - Election of officers; meetings; minutes and records. 
(a)  The comprehensive land use planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairman. The comprehensive land use planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be a county employee, or a member of the planning commission. 
(b)  Meetings of the comprehensive land use planning commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the comprehensive land use planning commission may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the comprehensive land use planning commission shall be open to the public pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Meeting Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The comprehensive land use planning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the comprehensive land use planning commission and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 2-12-87, § 2) 
Sec. 2-73. - Duties. 
In conjunction with the county planning and zoning commission, the duties of the comprehensive land use planning commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Review all existing ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations which affect the use of land in the county. 
(2)  Assess the current and future needs of the county with regard to the regulations of land use and development. 
(3)  Develop a land use plan for the county through the year 2010. 
(4)  Submit for adoption by the board of commissioners an ordinance regulating land use in the county. The objectives of the comprehensive land use planning commission in the development of such ordinance shall be: 
a.  Protecting the right of the current owners of land in the county to be free from restrictive regulations which will unduly affect their ability to use their land. 
b.  Facilitating the adequate provision of water, transportation, sewage disposal, schools and public services. 
c.  Preventing the overcrowding of the land and the preservation of the agricultural areas of the county. 
d.  Conserving the value of the land and all improvements situated thereon. 
e.  Providing adequate housing for all the people of the county. 
f.  Regulating the future use of land in the county in such a manner as to encourage the development of high quality business and industry which will contribute to the stability of the county's economy. 
(Ord. of 2-12-87, § 3) 
Secs. 2-74—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RECREATION COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5). 

Sec. 2-86. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The resolution adopted September 6, 1979, which created a county recreation system, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 2-87—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREE ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-91. - Creation; duties. 
The county board of commissioners hereby creates a tree advisory commission to investigate the issues related to the loss of trees, and to advise the county board of commissioners on this research including, but not limited to, the following tasks: 
(1)  Monitoring opinions of such diverse groups as commercial/industrial developers, municipalities of the county, representative citizens of the county, timber growers, the county chamber of commerce, homebuilders, and professionals in natural resource management; 
(2)  Studying and evaluating the rate of tree loss in county using digital aerial technology; 
(3)  Evaluating the scope and effectiveness of programs to protect trees in selected municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Coweta County, the City of Newnan, and Douglas County; 
(4)  Examining the feasibility of retaining a professional arborist to advise county planners; 
(5)  Submitting factual findings, recommendations and alternatives to the county board of commissioners on a regular basis, but no less than every three months. 
(Res. of 8-9-00) 
Sec. 2-92. - Composition. 
The county board of commissioners hereby creates the tree advisory commission, an advisory group of not more than twenty-five (25) persons to be appointed by the county commission chairman, the tree advisory commission shall be comprised of five (5) citizens of county, a professional arborist, a water quality expert, county planner, and a representative from each of the following professional groups: 
(1)  Developers/homebuilders in the county (3 representatives); 
(2)  County historical society; 
(3)  County timber grower's association; 
(4)  County chamber of commerce 
(Res. of 8-9-00) 
Sec. 2-93. - Additional representation. 
Each of the following municipalities which endorse the resolution from which this division derives may appoint a representative: 
(1)  City of Bowdon; 
(2)  City of Carrollton; 
(3)  City of Mount Zion; 
(4)  City of Roopville; 
(5)  City of Temple; 
(6)  City of Villa Rica; and 
(7)  City of Whitesburg. 
(Res. of 8-9-00) 
DIVISION 6. - LAND USE ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

Sec. 2-94. - Purpose and title. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of this division to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county by creating an administrative board with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in the county where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. 
(b)  Title. This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Enforcement Board Ordinance." 
(c)  Authority and application. These rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 36-74-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-95. - Land use enforcement board. 
(a)  Creation. There is created a land use enforcement board (hereinafter referred to as the "land use board"). 
(b)  Membership; term of office. The land use board shall comprise three members. The initial appointment shall consist of one member to be appointed for a term of two years, and two members to be appointed for a term of four years each. The board of commissioners may appoint up to two alternate members to serve on the land use board in the absence of land use board members. Upon the expiration of the initial terms, all subsequent terms shall be for three years. A member may be reappointed upon approval of the board of commissioners. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(c)  Officers, compensation of members. The land use board shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until reappointed or a successor is appointed. The land use board shall appoint a vice chairperson. The presence of three members (alternates shall be counted as members) shall constitute a quorum of the land use board. Members shall serve with compensation set by the board of commissioners, and may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the board of commissioners or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. The land use board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Appeals. (Reserved) 
(2)  Code enforcement hearings. Hear and decide enforcement issues authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. 
(3)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance or prohibit such actions as are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the county ordinances. 
(4)  Impose administrative fines for a violation involving the health or safety of a third party not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. 
(e)  Meetings; rules of procedure. The land use board shall adopt rules of procedure that are consistent with this division and at a minimum, ensure that each side has an equal opportunity to present evidence and argument in support of its case. A copy of all rules made by the land use board shall be available to all parties to cases before the land use board, and shall be posted in the department. Meetings of the land use board shall be at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the members of the land use board may determine. With the approval of the state court or magistrate court, the land use board may subpoena alleged violators, witnesses and evidence to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff, marshal, or by any other individual authorized by O.C.G.A. § 24-10-23 and subsection 2-96(a)(1) to serve subpoenas. The chairperson or, in his absence, or the vice-chairperson may administer oaths and may take testimony under oath. 
(f)  Grounds for removal. For the purpose of this section, any member may be removed as follows: 
(1)  The board of commissioners may remove any member for any one or more of the following reasons, which shall constitute a reason "for cause." 
a.  Participating at any land use board meeting under the influence of intoxicants, alcohol, or unprescribed or illegal drugs or using, possessing or for selling the same. 
b.  Conduct unbecoming of a member of the land use board, including, but not limited to, demeaning conduct or use of profanity or vulgar language during any open public meeting of the land use board. 
c.  Indictment of a felony. 
d.  Unauthorized use of county property, county telephones or other county communication equipment. 
e.  Filing false expense reports. 
f.  Two absences from land use board meetings within a six-month period. 
(2)  If any member holds or qualifies to hold any elected office or position in the county or in any city having its incorporated limits within the county, the member's appointment shall be automatically vacant, and the board of commissioners shall promptly fill such vacancy. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-96. - Enforcement of county ordinances. 
The board of commissioners hereby authorizes that ordinance violations may be tried upon citations or notifications with or without a prosecuting attorney. 
(1)  The director of the department of community development (hereinafter referred to as "director"), may proceed with prosecutions for violations of ordinances upon citations or notifications under section 2-98(c). The director is designated as the chief agent, and the persons assigned and fulfilling the positions thereunder as code enforcement officers, building inspectors and other department officials, as agents for the purposes of completing, signing, issuing and serving citations and notifications. 
(2)  The director is hereby authorized and directed to administer and begin enforcement proceedings for county ordinances, including but not limited to zoning ordinances and resolutions, ordinances and resolutions enacting subdivision regulations, environmental ordinances and resolutions, state minimum standard construction codes, ordinances and resolutions regulating the development of real property, and ordinances and regulations relating to the use of land (hereinafter collectively referred to as "county ordinances"). The director is further authorized to render interpretations of county ordinances, which are consistent with its intent and purpose, or seek a legal opinion from the county attorney. 
(3)  The county attorney, or his designee, may represent the county by presenting cases before the land use board. 
(4)  Right of entry. In performance of the duty to enforce county ordinances, the director shall have the power to enter upon any land and make inspections following the presentation of proper credentials, as follows: 
a.  With the consent of the property owner or another person with the authority to grant consent; 
b.  Where the property owner or occupant has no reasonable expectation of privacy thereon; or 
c.  Where making an inspection to enforce the provisions of the county ordinances is necessary, or where the director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or on the premises a condition that is contrary to or violating county ordinances, or which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the director, or his designee, is authorized to enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the county ordinances, if such structure or premise is unoccupied. 
(5)  Entrance upon land and inspection pursuant to paragraph (4) above shall not constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21, nor shall any owner or occupant of the property have a cause of action for trespass except intentional, knowing, or reckless damage to the property. 
(6)  The director may receive from any person informal communications alleging that a person or persons are or may be violating county ordinances or that property is or may be noncompliant with county ordinances. Such communications may include a petition under subsection 2-97(b), reports or memoranda from agents of other agencies, including but not limited to the sheriff's department. The director may act upon communications as it deems appropriate given their level of credibility. 
(7)  In performance of its duty to enforce county ordinances, the director may notify or warn persons that they are or may be violating county ordinances or that their property is or may be noncompliant with county ordinances or state law. 
a.  Such notices or warnings may be used as evidence of the duration of a violation or of notice to the recipient of the allegations or facts contained in the notice or warning. 
b.  Such notices or warnings shall notify the person of the alleged violation or noncompliance in sufficient detail that they may act upon the notice or warning and cease the violation or place the property in compliance. Such notices or warnings shall state the provision or provisions of the county ordinances alleged to have been violated, and may notify the person of the terms of this division and the designation and delegation of powers pursuant to this section. 
c.  A notice or warning may state that, if the property is not compliant by a reasonable date prescribed in the notice or warning, enforcement proceedings may be commenced after that date. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-97. - Election of procedures. 
(a)  Election of procedures. When the director has reason to believe that a person or persons has violated, is in violation of, or is about to violate county ordinances and that a resort to informal enforcement methods will not achieve or has not achieved compliance, and the director thereof decides to enforce the county ordinances and seek compliance from that person or persons, he shall, at his option, either: 
(1)  Commence an administrative enforcement proceeding before the land use board pursuant to this division; 
(2)  Commence a civil enforcement proceeding; or 
(3)  Commence a criminal enforcement proceeding. 
(b)  Citizen petition. Any adult resident, lessee, or property owner whose property is affected by an alleged noncompliance of a county ordinance by another nearby resident, lessee, or property owner, may file with the director a petition in compliance with the requirements of this section stating that a person or persons is in violation of or county ordinances. The director shall review the petition and give it due regard in determining whether or not to commence administrative, civil, or criminal enforcement proceedings, based upon the allegations of the petition, pursuant to subsection (a) above. The director may conduct an investigation of the allegations in the petition in making its determination. 
(1)  The director shall make a decision on the petition within 30 days of receiving the petition, and must notify in writing the person or persons who signed the petition of the decision and the basis therefor. 
(2)  A petition pursuant to this section shall set forth a description of the alleged violation in sufficient detail that the director or his designee may commence an enforcement proceeding, administrative, civil, or criminal, in response to the petition. 
(3)  A petition shall be signed, and the signatory shall attest with his or her signature that: 
a.  The signatory has personal knowledge of the facts that are the foundations of the allegations in the petition; 
b.  The allegations therein are true to the best knowledge of the signatory; and 
c.  The signatory is aware of the penalty provided in subsection (b)(4). 
(4)  It shall constitute an offense of false swearing under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71 to sign or file, or cause to be signed or filed, a petition pursuant to this section, or a document purporting to be a petition pursuant to this section, with the knowledge that any material allegation therein is untrue. 
(5)  If the director decides not to commence an enforcement proceeding based on a petition that was filed by a person or persons who may under this section file a petition, that person or persons may appeal the director's decision in a court of law or equity. 
(c)  The adoption of this division shall not, by itself, preclude or prohibit the board of commissioners or the director from enforcing its ordinances and resolutions through a civil proceeding. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall be interpreted as eliminating or amending any cause of action for nuisance or in the nature of nuisance that any person may have, or eliminating or limiting the right of any person to commence and prosecute a civil action based upon such a cause of action. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-98. - Initiating of proceedings; time to correct violations; repeat violations; hearings. 
(a)  Initiating proceedings. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the director, or his designee, to initiate enforcement proceedings pursuant to the various codes. 
(2)  If a violation of any county ordinance is found, the director, or his designee, shall notify the violator and give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the director shall proceed with enforcement through the appropriate court or shall proceed with enforcement through the land use board. If the director proceeds through the land use board, the director shall notify the land use board and request a hearing. The land use board shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or made as provided in subsection (d) to said violator. At the option of the land use board, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in subsection (d). If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the director, the case may be presented to the land use board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the land use board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(3)  If a repeat violation is found, the director shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The director, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the land use board and request a hearing. The land use board shall schedule a hearing and shall provide written notice pursuant to this division. The case may be presented to the land use board even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the land use board hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(4)  If the director has substantial reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the director shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the land use board and request an emergency hearing. 
(b)  Calling of hearings; hearing proceedings. 
(1)  Upon request of the director, or at such other times as may be necessary, the chairperson of the land use board may call a hearing of the land use board. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by the land use board, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The board of commissioners may provide or assign clerical and administrative personnel to assist the land use board in the proper performance of its duties. 
(2)  Each case before the land use board may be presented by the county attorney, the director, a code enforcement officer, or a building inspector. 
(3)  The land use board shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The land use board shall take testimony from the director, witnesses, code enforcement officer and alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. 
(4)  Preparation of finding and conclusions. At the conclusion of the hearing, the land use board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this division. The hearing may be continued until such time as the findings of fact and conclusions of law have been prepared. The findings and conclusions shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, however, two members of the three member land use board must vote in order for the action to be official. The order may include a compliance date and a fine if the order is not complied with by said compliance date. 
(5)  Recording of order in county public records. The land use board may require a certified copy of such order to be recorded in the public records of the county, which shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator. If the order is recorded in the public records of the county and the violation concerns real property, the violation shall constitute notice to all any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the land use board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(c)  Form of enforcement notice. 
(1)  The director, or his authorized agent, shall commence an enforcement proceeding by preparing and serving an enforcement notice (also referred to as notification) pursuant to this Section. 
(2)  An enforcement notice shall contain: 
a.  The names and addresses of all persons to whom the enforcement notice shall be sent; 
b.  A common description (e.g., an address) of the property or properties where the alleged violations have occurred or are occurring; 
c.  A description of the alleged violation in sufficient detail; 
d.  A description of the relief or penalties that are sought by the director for the alleged violation; 
e.  The date, time and place of the hearing before the land use board; 
f.  Notification of the right to testify, present reasonable evidence, summon and question witnesses, and have counsel present at the hearing; 
g.  Notification of the right of the person or persons to respond to the allegations in writing before the hearing including a statement of the time limitations thereof; and 
h.  The address, telephone and facsimile number at which the director may be contacted, including for purposes of a written response. 
(3)  Each notification shall be filed with the department, shall indicate the information set forth in subsection (c)(2), the date of service, and shall be signed by the director or his authorized agent who completes and serves the notification. 
(d)  Service of enforcement notice. 
(1)  The enforcement notice of a violation required by this division shall be provided to the following: 
a.  All persons alleged to have violated county ordinances; and 
b.  All owners of record of the property or properties upon which the alleged violations have occurred or are occurring. 
(2)  The enforcement notice shall be provided by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested; by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated in subsection 2-96(a)(1); or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice. 
(3)  In addition to providing enforcement notice as set forth in subsections (d)(1) and (2), at the option of the land use board, enforcement notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
a.  Enforcement notice may be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements are printed in the county. Proof of publication shall be made by affidavit of a duly authorized representative of the newspaper; or 
b.  Enforcement notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery, mail, or statutory overnight delivery as required under subsection (d)(2) of this section. Evidence that an attempt has been made to deliver notice by hand, mail, or statutory overnight delivery as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, together with proof of publication or posting as provided in this subsection, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this section have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-99. - Enforcement hearings. 
(a)  Conduct of hearings. 
(1)  The land use board shall hold a hearing on the allegations of the enforcement notice at the date, time and place set forth in that notice. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, the term "parties" shall refer to the director and all persons to whom an enforcement notice is sent pursuant to subsection 2-98(d). 
(3)  Postponement. Three days before the scheduled date of the hearing, any party may for good cause request in writing from the land use board a postponement or advancement of the hearing. The requesting party shall transmit a copy of the request to all parties, whereupon all parties may promptly respond in writing to the request. The land use board, acting through its chairman, shall consider the request for postponement or advancement if the requesting party shows good cause to grant the request and no other party shows good cause to deny the request. A request for postponement or advancement may be denied if any party shows good cause why it should be denied. The land use board, acting through its chairman, shall notify all parties in writing whether or not a postponement or advancement has been granted and, if so, its duration. 
a.  If a written request is received less than three days before the date of the hearing, a postponement may be by agreement between parties, or the land use board may grant a postponement within its discretion. 
b.  It shall constitute good cause to postpone the hearing when one or more of the persons alleged in the enforcement notice to have violated county ordinances has not been duly served with the enforcement notice at least five days before the hearing. 
c.  It shall constitute good cause to postpone the hearing when a party other than one alleged in the enforcement notice to have violated county ordinances has not been duly served with the enforcement notice at least five days before the hearing. 
(b)  Submitting written responses. 
(1)  Any party may submit to the land use board a written response to the enforcement notice before the hearing. A copy of the response shall be submitted to all other parties simultaneously and in the same manner that the response was submitted to the land use board. 
(2)  If all persons alleged in the enforcement notice to be violating or have violated county ordinances submit a written response in which they admit the validity of all allegations of the enforcement notice and consent to the remedies and penalties requested by the director in the enforcement notice, then: 
a.  There shall be no hearing; 
b.  The allegations of the enforcement notice shall be the determination of the land use board in the enforcement order as if there were a hearing on the allegations; and 
c.  The remedies and penalties applied in the enforcement order shall be those requested in the enforcement notice, or such other remedies and penalties as are proposed by the parties and approved by the land use board. 
(3)  If all persons alleged in the enforcement notice to be violating or have violated county ordinances submit such a written response in which they admit the validity of all allegations of the enforcement notice, but one or more parties contest or object to the remedies or penalties requested in the enforcement notice, then: 
a.  The allegations of the enforcement notice shall be the determination of the land use board in the enforcement order as if there were a hearing on the allegations; and 
b.  A hearing shall be held, but only on the issue of the remedies and penalties to be applied in the enforcement order. 
(4)  If one or more, but not all, persons alleged in the enforcement notice to be violating or have violated county ordinances submit such a written response in which they admit the validity of all allegations of the enforcement notice, the response or responses shall be given due weight by the land use board but the hearing shall proceed on all relevant issues. 
(c)  Appearance of parties. All persons alleged in the enforcement notice to be violating or have violated county ordinances shall have an opportunity to be present at the hearing, either in person or through legal counsel. A default decision that the person has violated county ordinances as alleged may be made if such a person was duly served with an enforcement notice, is not present at the hearing, and there is a finding that there is or was a violation of county ordinances. 
(d)  Right to present evidence. At the hearing, any party, except parties who, pursuant to subsection (b) above, are not entitled to a hearing, may present evidence and testimony, summon witnesses, question all witnesses and be represented by and receive the advice of legal counsel. 
(e)  Standards for decisions. The issues for the land use board to decide, by a preponderance of the evidence, are: 
(1)  Whether the alleged violator or violators are violating or have violated any county ordinances; 
(2)  If so, what remedies or penalties are appropriate and just, taking into consideration the requests of the director in the enforcement notice. 
(f)  Interpretation of ordinances. The interpretation or meaning of any county ordinance shall be a valid issue for the land use board to decide. The validity or constitutionality of any county ordinance shall not be a valid issue for determination at the hearing, except in such cases that a person alleged to have violated a regulation claims in good faith that the regulation in question is directly contrary to another regulation of equal or superior force, which he or she alleges that he or she has not violated. Questions of validity or constitutionality of any county ordinance, or amendment of the local comprehensive plan, that are properly raised before the land use board shall be preserved for appeal. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-100. - Enforcement order; remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Issuance of enforcement order. 
(1)  Within ten days of the enforcement hearing, or from the date upon which the hearing was to be held if there was no hearing, the land use board shall issue in writing an appropriate enforcement order. The order shall be sent by certified mail or facsimile to all parties. 
(2)  The enforcement order shall state the determination of the land use board regarding the allegations of the enforcement notice, and shall state in reasonable detail all legal and factual bases for that determination. 
(3)  If the land use board determines that no violation of county ordinances is being or has been committed by any person alleged to have done so in the enforcement notice, the enforcement notice shall be dismissed and the enforcement order shall so state. 
(4)  If the land use board determines that a violation of county ordinances is being or has been committed, the enforcement order shall state the appropriate and just remedies or penalties, and shall state the party or parties against which the enforcement order is effective. The remedies and penalties may include: 
a.  An order to cease and desist from continuing and future violation of county ordinances; 
b.  An order to bring the property in question into compliance with county ordinances; 
c.  An order to perform a specific act or acts, or to refrain from a specific act or acts, which effectuates the purposes of subsections (a)(4)a. and b. above; 
d.  Authorization for the department to enter upon the property and take all reasonable necessary steps to place the property in compliance with county ordinances, combined with an order to compensate the department for all reasonable expenses incurred pursuant to this subparagraph; and 
e.  An order to pay to the county a fine. Such fine shall not exceed $1,000.00 for each day of violation. 
(5)  Any owner or occupant of the property may be subject to an order pursuant to subsections (a)(4)a. through d. above, even if he or she is not determined in the enforcement order to be a violator. Only a violator may be subject to an order pursuant to subsection (a)(4)e. 
(6)  The enforcement order may include authorization for employees or agents of the director to enter upon the property in question in order to find that the enforcement order is being or has been compliant. Entrance upon land pursuant to an enforcement order, or any supplemental enforcement order, and to this section shall not constitute a violation of subsection 2-95(a)(4), nor shall any owner or occupant of the property have a cause of action for trespass except intentional, knowing, or reckless damage to the property. 
(b)  Monitoring compliance. 
(1)  The director shall monitor compliance with the enforcement order. If the director has reason to believe that any person subject to the enforcement order is not complying with the enforcement order, the director may, at its option, either: 
a.  Refer the matter to the county attorney for the commencement of a civil action. 
b.  Commence a supplemental enforcement action pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section; or 
c.  Refer the matter to the solicitor or district for the commencement of criminal proceedings. A referral or commencement under this paragraph (b)(1) does not preclude a later referral or commencement when noncompliance is alleged to be continuing or a new act of noncompliance is alleged. 
(2)  A supplemental enforcement action is commenced by the director by filing a petition with the land use board stating its belief that one or more persons subject to the enforcement order are not complying with the enforcement order, and the reasons for this belief. 
a.  A copy of the petition shall be sent by the director to all parties by certified mail or by facsimile. Any party alleged in the petition to be in noncompliance shall respond to the petition in writing, and any other party may respond to the petition in writing. 
b.  Upon receipt of the petition and of the responses of all parties required to respond, the land use board shall schedule a hearing on the petition and shall notify all parties of the date, time and place by certified mail or facsimile. If any party required to respond to the petition does not do so within fifteen days of receiving the petition, the land use board may schedule the hearing regardless. 
c.  The hearing shall be subject to the same rules and held according to the same procedures as an enforcement hearing pursuant to this division. 
d.  The land use board shall issue a supplemental enforcement order within five days of the completion of the hearing. 
e.  If the land use board finds that there is compliance with the enforcement order, then the petition shall be dismissed and the supplemental enforcement order shall so state. 
f.  If the land use board finds that there is continued noncompliance with the enforcement order, then the land use board shall include in the supplemental enforcement order an order or authorization: 
1.  That the person or persons in noncompliance pay an additional fine, either a single fine or a fine assessed for each day of noncompliance; 
2.  That the director enter upon the property and take all reasonably necessary steps to place the property in compliance with county ordinances, and that the person or persons in noncompliance compensate the director for all reasonable expenses incurred pursuant to this subparagraph; 
3.  That the matter be referred to the county attorney for the commencement of a civil action. 
4.  That the matter is referred to the prosecuting authority for the commencement of criminal proceedings. 
(c)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  The land use board, upon notification by the director that an order of the land use board has not been complied with by the set time may order the violator to pay an administrative fine in an amount specified in this section. 
(2)  An administrative fine imposed pursuant to this section for a violation involving the health or safety of a third party shall not exceed $1000.00 per day. 
(3)  An administrative fine imposed pursuant to this section for a violation that is not a violation involving the health or safety of a third party shall not exceed a total of $1,000.00. 
(4)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the land use board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation; 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(5)  The land use board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Recording an order. The director is hereby authorized to record a certified copy of an order imposing an administrative fine in the public records of any county that thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon a petition to the superior court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the land use board may request the county attorney to foreclose on the lien. 
(e)  Outstanding fines. An outstanding unpaid administrative fine will preclude the issuance of any further permit or certificate of occupancy by the department for persons against whom the fine is imposed. 
(f)  Length of liens. No lien imposed under this chapter shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(g)  Appeals to superior court. An aggrieved party, including the board of commissioners, may appeal a final administrative order of the land use board to the superior court. Such an appeal shall be a hearing de novo. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date the final order is issued. 
(Ord. of 8-6-02; Ord. of 10-1-02, § 3) 
Secs. 2-101—2-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately a manual of purchasing policies and procedures. An official copy of that manual is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1; board of commissioners authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; requirement for governing authority to establish a fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; county authorities to designate depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-105. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The resolution adopted February 8, 1994 providing for all vending machine commissions and telephone commissions from equipment on county property to be remitted to the comptroller's office, and the resolution adopted February 8, 1994 providing for disposition of funds derived from sales to inmates at the inmate store at the county jail facility are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
Sec. 2-106. - Purchasing card and credit card regulations for county elected officials. 
(a)  Intent and scope. This section is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the county board of commissioners. Unless the board of commissioners designates otherwise, the card administrator for the county shall be the county clerk. 
County means Carroll County and/or the board of commissioners 
County purchase card , county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)  Designated elected officials. The county board of commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this section or for any purchases that are not authorized by this section. 
In regards to the sheriff of the county, the sheriff, a constitutional officer, hereby accedes to the P-card policy only to comply with Georgia law as set forth at O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 and it is neither intended by the sheriff nor contemplated by the county commissioners, that by signing the policy the sheriff is ceding in any manner his budgetary autonomy as controlled by the Georgia Constitution and pertinent case law. The sheriff is only acquiescing to this policy for P-card (credit) purchases, and (1) otherwise retains all legal autonomy with respect to budgetary expenditures and (2) may withdraw from the agreement at any time (accompanied by a contemporaneous relinquishment of the P-card to the county). This agreement shall not be construed as consenting to the applicability of, or any interpretation of, the above statute. 
(d)  Card administrator. The board of commissioners designates the county clerk as the county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this section, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the County's record retention policy. 
(e)  Use of cards. 
(1)  Authorized purchases. County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this section, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $2,000.00 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. The county purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used to purchase wine, beer or alcoholic beverages of any kind. Moreover, the county purchasing cards and credit cards are not to be used to purchase in-room movies or other entertain with hotel or motel charges. 
(3)  Receipts and documentation. The receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(4)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(f)  Review of purchases and audit. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: 
Within five business days of using a county credit card, the elected official shall provide the receipts from the transaction to county clerk. The county clerk will balance the receipts to the credit card statement from the card provider. The county clerk will then provide the reconciled statement to accounts payable with the back-up receipts for payment. If the county clerk determines that a purchase does not meet the county guidelines, the county clerk shall seek reimbursement of the charge from the official who initiated the charge. 
The use of the county's purchasing card is restricted to use by county's purchasing analyst, technician or comptroller. The purchasing analyst, technician or comptroller (whoever makes the purchase) shall enter such purchase on the purchasing card log at the time the purchase is made. Upon receipt of the statement from the card provider, the finance department shall reconcile the statement, purchasing card log and the receipts/invoices for the purchases. Following reconciliation, the finance department shall provide the reconciled payment along with a copy of the receipts/invoices to accounts payable for payment. 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(g)  Violations. 
(1)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this section or the user agreement. 
(2)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this section may result in: 
a.  A warning; 
b.  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
c.  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Res. of 1-5-16(1)) 
EXHIBIT A — PURCHASING CARD AND/OR CREDIT CARD USER AGREEMENT BETWEEN CARROLL COUNTY AND CARROLL COUNTY ELECTED OFFICIALS 
This Purchasing Card and/or Credit Card User Agreement is between the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County (hereinafter "County") and ___________ (hereinafter "Elected Official"), an elected official of Carroll County for use of Carroll County Purchasing and/or Credit Card (hereinafter "card"), issued by Bank of North Georgia and/or Regions Bank (hereinafter "Bank"), in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(2). 
In exchange for the privilege of being issued or using a County card for the purpose of purchasing goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official of the County, Elected Official agrees as follows: 
I.  Authorized and Unauthorized Use. 
a.  Elected Official agrees to use the card for goods and services directly related to Elected Official's public duties. 
b.  Elected Official agrees to use the card for the purchase of goods and services authorized by the budget adopted by the Board of Commissioners. 
c.  Elected Official shall not use the card for personal use, alcohol beverages or any use other than goods and service directly related to the official responsibilities of Elected Official. 
d.  Elected Official shall not exceed the following transaction limit for the card: 
All Elected Officials except Chairman of Board of Commissioners shall have a Per Transaction limit of $2,000.00. 
The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners shall have a Per Transaction limit of $12,500.00. 
e.  Elected Official shall not subdivide a purchase in an effort to circumvent the transaction limit for the card. 
f.  Elected Official shall not request or receive cash from suppliers or vendors as a result of exchanges or returns. All refunds or exchanges must be credited to the card account. 
II.  Obligations of Elected Official. Elected Official agrees to use the card in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement, the Purchasing Card and Credit Card Ordinance for Carroll County Elected Officials ("Ordinance"), incorporated herein by reference, as it may be amended from time to time, and any procedures developed in relation to the use of the card. 
a.  Elected Official agrees to cooperate with the Card Administrator in relation to the use of the card, including participation in training, submission of receipts and documentation, notification of lost or stolen cards, etc. 
b.  Elected Official shall comply with the County's budget, purchasing policies and procedures when making purchases with the card. 
c.  Elected Official shall notify the Card Administrator, if Elected Official's name or contact information changes, within thirty days of such change. 
d.  Elected Official shall protect the card at all times to prevent unauthorized use. 
e.  Elected official shall immediately notify the Bank and Card Administrator if the card is lost or stolen. 
f.  Elected Official shall surrender the card immediately upon request, expiration, resignation or removal from office. 
g.  Elected Officials acknowledges that he or she is the only individual authorized to use the card. 
h.  Elected Official(s) acknowledge(s) that purchases by the County are exempt from Georgia sales tax. Elected Official shall provide any supplier or vendor with the County's tax exempt number (58-6000794). 
III.  Receipts and Documentation. Receipts are required for all Card transactions. Elected Official shall provide within five (5) business days the receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with the card as required by the Card Administrator. Substantiating documentation shall include the supplier or merchant information, quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to demonstrate that the expense was in the performance of official County duties. 
IV.  Violations. In the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, failure to comply with the terms of this agreement or the ordinance may result in one or more of the following: 
a.  Warning; 
b.  Suspension of card privileges; 
c.  Termination of card privileges; 
d.  Collection of an amount equal to the total of any improper purchases, including but not limited to declaring such purchases as an advance on salary to the extent allowed by law; and/or 
e.  Prosecution. Official understands and acknowledges that misuse of the card may be considered a crime. Suspected misuse of the card may be reported to the proper authorities for prosecution. 
V.  Term. This agreement shall be for effective for a period of a calendar year effective the 1 st day of January, 2016. Provided the Elected Official remains eligible for a county issued card, this agreement will automatically renew for successive terms. Either party may terminate the agreement with five (5) days notice. The card shall be promptly returned to the Card Administrator in the event of such termination. The Elected Official's obligations of this agreement shall survive the termination of this agreement. 

 
(Res. of 1-5-16(1)) 
EXHIBIT B — RELEVANT CODE SECTIONS 
O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30 
As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  "Acquirer" means a business organization, government, financial institution, or an agent of a business organization, government, or financial institution that authorizes a merchant to accept payment by financial transaction card for money, goods, services, or anything else of value. 
(2)  "Automated banking device" means any machine which when properly activated by a financial transaction card and personal identification code may be used for any of the purposes for which a financial transaction card may be used. 
(3)  "Cardholder" means the person, government, or organization to whom or for whose benefit the financial transaction card is issued by an issuer. 
(4)  "Expired financial transaction card" means a financial transaction card which is no longer valid because the term for which it was issued has elapsed. 
(5)  "Financial transaction card" or "FTC" means any instrument or device, whether known as a credit card, credit plate, bank services card, banking card, check guarantee card, debit card, or by any other name, issued with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the cardholder: 
(A)  In obtaining money, goods, services, or anything else of value; 
(B)  In certifying or guaranteeing to a person or business the availability to the cardholder of funds on deposit that are equal to or greater than the amount necessary to honor a draft or check payable to the order of such person or business; or 
(C)  In providing the cardholder access to a demand deposit account, savings account, or time deposit account for the purpose of: 
(i)  Making deposits of money or checks therein; 
(ii)  Withdrawing funds in the form of money, money orders, or traveler's checks therefrom; 
(iii)  Transferring funds from any demand deposit account, savings account, or time deposit account to any other demand deposit account, savings account, or time deposit account; 
(iv)  Transferring funds from any demand deposit account, savings account, or time deposit account to any credit card accounts, overdraft privilege accounts, loan accounts, or any other credit accounts in full or partial satisfaction of any outstanding balance owed existing therein; 
(v)  For the purchase of goods, services, or anything else of value; or 
(vi)  Obtaining information pertaining to any demand deposit account, savings account, or time deposit account. 
(5.1)  "Financial transaction card account number" means a number, numerical code, alphabetical code, or alphanumeric code assigned by the issuer to a particular financial transaction card and which identifies the cardholder's account with the issuer. 
(5.2)  "Government" means: 
(A)  Every state department, agency, board, bureau, commission, and authority; 
(B)  Every county, municipal corporation, school system, or other political subdivision of this state; 
(C)  Every department, agency, board, bureau, commission, authority, or similar body of each such county, municipal corporation, school system, or other political subdivision of this state; and 
(D)  Every city, county, regional, or other authority established pursuant to the laws of this state. 
(6)  "Issuer" means the business organization or financial institution or its duly authorized agent which issues a financial transaction card. 
(7)  "Personal identification code" means a numeric or alphabetical code, signature, photograph, fingerprint, or any other means of electronic or mechanical confirmation used by the cardholder of a financial transaction card to permit authorized electronic use of that financial transaction card. 
(8)  "Presenting" means those actions taken by a cardholder or any person to introduce a financial transaction card into an automated banking device with or without utilization of a personal identification code or merely displaying or showing, with intent to defraud, a financial transaction card to the issuer or to any person or organization providing money, goods, services, or anything else of value or to any other entity. 
(8.1)  "Purchasing card," "PCard," or "P-Card" means a type of financial transaction card allowing persons, governments, or business organizations to use financial transaction infrastructure. 
(9)  "Receives" or "receiving" means acquiring possession of or control of or accepting a financial transaction card as security for a loan. 
(10)  "Revoked financial transaction card" means a financial transaction card which is no longer valid because permission to use it has been suspended or terminated by the issuer. 
O.C.G.A. § 16-9-33 
(a)  A person commits the offense of financial transaction card fraud when, with intent to defraud the issuer; a person or organization providing money, goods, services, or anything else of value; or any other person; or cardholder, such person: 
(1)  Uses for the purpose of obtaining money, goods, services, or anything else of value: 
(A)  A financial transaction card obtained or retained or which was received with knowledge that it was obtained or retained in violation of Code Section 16-9-31 or 16-9-32; 
(B)  A financial transaction card which he or she knows is forged, altered, expired, revoked, or was obtained as a result of a fraudulent application in violation of subsection (d) of this Code section; or 
(C)  The financial transaction card account number of a financial transaction card which he or she knows has not in fact been issued or is forged, altered, expired, revoked, or was obtained as a result of a fraudulent application in violation of subsection (d) of this Code section; 
(2)  Obtains money, goods, services, or anything else of value by: 
(A)  Representing without the consent of the cardholder that he or she is the holder of a specified card; 
(B)  Presenting the financial transaction card without the authorization or permission of the cardholder or issuer; 
(C)  Falsely representing that he or she is the holder of a card and such card has not in fact been issued; or 
(D)  Giving, orally or in writing, a financial transaction card account number to the provider of the money, goods, services, or other thing of value for billing purposes without the authorization or permission of the cardholder or issuer for such use; 
(3)  Obtains control over a financial transaction card as security for debt; 
(4)  Deposits into his or her account or any account by means of an automated banking device a false, fictitious, forged, altered, or counterfeit check, draft, money order, or any other such document not his or her lawful or legal property; or 
(5)  Receives money, goods, services, or anything else of value as a result of a false, fictitious, forged, altered, or counterfeit check, draft, money order, or any other such document having been deposited into an account via an automated banking device, knowing at the time of receipt of the money, goods, services, or item of value that the document so deposited was false, fictitious, forged, altered, or counterfeit or that the above-deposited item was not his lawful or legal property. 
(b)  A person who is authorized by an issuer to furnish money, goods, services, or anything else of value upon presentation of a financial transaction card by the cardholder or any agent or employee of such person commits the offense of financial transaction card fraud when, with intent to defraud the issuer or the cardholder, he or she: 
(1)  Furnishes money, goods, services, or anything else of value upon presentation of a financial transaction card obtained or retained in violation of Code Section 16-9-31 or a financial transaction card which he or she knows is forged, expired, or revoked; 
(2)  Alters a charge ticket or purchase ticket to reflect a larger amount than that approved by the cardholder; or 
(3)  Fails to furnish money, goods, services, or anything else of value which he or she represents in writing to the issuer that he or she has furnished. 
(c)  Conviction of the offense of financial transaction card fraud as provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this Code section is punishable as provided in subsection (a) of Code Section 16-9-38 if the value of all money, goods, services, and other things of value furnished in violation of this Code section or if the difference between the value actually furnished and the value represented to the issuer to have been furnished in violation of this Code section does not exceed $100.00 in any six-month period. Conviction of the offense of financial transaction card fraud as provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this Code section is punishable as provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 16-9-38 if such value exceeds $100.00 in any six-month period. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of financial transaction card fraud when, upon application for a financial transaction card to an issuer, he or she knowingly makes or causes to be made a false statement or report relative to his or her name, occupation, employer, financial condition, assets, or liabilities or willfully and substantially overvalues any assets or willfully omits or substantially undervalues any indebtedness for the purpose of influencing the issuer to issue a financial transaction card. Financial transaction card fraud as provided in this subsection is punishable as provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 16-9-38. 
(e)  A cardholder commits the offense of financial transaction card fraud when he or she willfully, knowingly, and with an intent to defraud the issuer; a person or organization providing money, goods, services, or anything else of value; or any other person submits verbally or in writing to the issuer or any other person any false notice or report of the theft, loss, disappearance, or non-receipt of his or her financial transaction card and personal identification code. Conviction of the offense of financial transaction card fraud as provided in this subsection is punishable as provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 16-9-38. 
(f)  A person authorized by an acquirer to furnish money, goods, services, or anything else of value upon presentation of a financial transaction card or a financial transaction card account number by a cardholder or any agent or employee of such person, who, with intent to defraud the issuer, acquirer, or cardholder, remits to an issuer or acquirer, for payment, a financial transaction card record of a sale, which sale was not made by such person, agent, or employee, commits the offense of financial transaction card fraud. Conviction of the offense of financial transaction card fraud as provided in this subsection shall be punishable as provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 16-9-38. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(h)  For purposes of this Code section, revocation shall be construed to include either notice given in person or notice given in writing to the person to whom the financial transaction card and personal identification code was issued. Notice of revocation shall be immediate when notice is given in person. The sending of a notice in writing by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery in the United States mail, duly stamped and addressed to such person at his or her last address known to the issuer, shall be prima-facie evidence that such notice was duly received after seven days from the date of deposit in the mail. If the address is located outside the United States, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Canal Zone, and Canada, notice shall be presumed to have been received ten days after mailing by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. 
O.C.G.A. § 16-9-37 
(a)  Any person who has been issued or entrusted with a financial transaction card for specifically authorized purposes, provided such authorization is in writing stating a maximum amount charges that can be made with the financial transaction card, and who uses the financial transaction card in a manner and for purposes not authorized in order to obtain or purchase money, goods, services, or anything else of value shall be punished as provided in subsection (a) of Code Section 16-9-38. 
(b)  Any person who has been issued or entrusted with a financial transaction card by a government for specifically limited and specifically authorized purposes, provided such limitations and authorizations are in writing, and who uses the financial transaction card in a manner and for purposes not authorized shall be punished as provided in subsection (b) of Code Section 16-9-38. 
O.C.G.A. § 16-9-38 
(a)  A person who is subject to the punishment and penalties of this subsection shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not less than one year nor more than two years, or both. 
(b)  A person subject to punishment under this subsection shall be guilty of a felony and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000.00 or imprisonment for not less than one year nor more than three years, or both. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 
(a)  An elected official of a county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government shall be prohibited from the use of a government purchasing card or a government credit card unless: 
(1)  Such purchases are solely for items or services that directly relate to such official's public duties; and 
(2)  Such purchases are in accordance with guidelines adopted by the county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government. 
(b)  Documents related to such purchases incurred by such elected officials shall be available for public inspection. 
(c)  No such county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government shall issue government purchasing cards or government credit cards to elected officials on or after January 1, 2016, until the governing authority of such county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government, by public vote, has authorized such issuance and has promulgated specific policies regarding the use of such government purchasing cards or government credit cards for elected officials of such county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government. Such policies shall include the following: 
(1)  Designation of officials who shall be authorized to be issued such government purchasing cards or government credit cards; 
(2)  A requirement that, before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card, authorized users shall sign and accept an agreement with the county, municipal corporation, local school system, or consolidated government issuing the government purchasing card or government credit card that such users will use such cards only in accordance with the policies of the issuing governmental entity; 
(3)  Transaction limits for the use of such cards; 
(4)  A description of purchases that shall be authorized for use of such cards; 
(5)  A description of purchases that shall not be authorized for use of such cards; 
(6)  Designation of a government purchasing card or government credit card administrator; 
(7)  A process for auditing and reviewing purchases made with such cards; and 
(8)  Procedures for addressing a violation of such purchasing card or credit card policies and imposing penalties for violations including, but not limited to, revocation of purchasing card or credit card privileges. Nothing in such procedures or any administrative action taken pursuant thereto shall preclude any other civil or criminal remedy under any other provision of law. 
(Res. of 1-5-16(1)) 
Secs. 2-107—2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR VEHICLE POLICY 

Sec. 2-126. - Generally. 
County employees will be provided vehicles to the extent feasible where needed to conduct county business. Vehicles may be assigned to a department for collective use or to an individual. Because an assignment to an individual employee for his or her exclusive use means that the county will incur both operating expense and depreciation of the value of the vehicle when it is driven for personal use (such as commuting), as well as for approved business use, such assignments will be avoided wherever possible. 
Where vehicles are used in a shared environment, vehicles will be assigned to a particular department. Criteria will be provided below to determine authorization for a vehicle assigned to an individual. Requirements for documenting each vehicle assignment, both for work day use and commuting use, are also specified. 
This policy will specifically not apply to vehicles routinely used by sworn P.O.S.T. certified/registered law enforcement officers in a secured environment for surveillance and/or undercover investigative work where knowledge of the identity of a vehicle or officer is potentially life-threatening. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Sec. 2-127. - Assignment of vehicles for work day use. 
Vehicles will be assigned to an individual employee only where it is necessary to conduct county business and where such assignment results in less cost to the county than reimbursing employees for the expenses they incur in the use of their private vehicle for county business. 
In addition, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  For each year an employee is assigned a vehicle, the employee must drive at least 10,000+ county business miles [10]. If after any one year of assignment, an employee does not drive 10,000 county miles, and the employee fails to drive 1500 miles the following quarter, the vehicle may no longer be assigned to the employee. 
(2)  If the total county business miles driven by an employee assigned a vehicle fails to exceed 10,000 business miles in a year, for the employee to continue being assigned a vehicle, the vehicle must: 
a.  Have special equipment or be used to transport equipment which is too large or heavy or has special features which make it impractical to be transferred between vehicles or between a vehicle and a fixed location; 
b.  Have a two-way radio which is used at least once per week to either give directions or receive directions which are a necessity to the ongoing operations of a particular department; or 
c.  Be required to drive to sites or under conditions which would endanger privately owned vehicles. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
The 10,000 minimum number of miles specified refer solely to those miles driven exclusively for county business. Miles driven between employees' residences and their work stations are not county business miles. 

Sec. 2-128. - Authorization for vehicles to be driven home overnight and on-call duty. 
(a)  Employees are not authorized to drive county vehicles to and from their residences on a routine basis except: 
(1)  A vehicle is for emergency use or is specially equipped and used for a related purpose; or 
(2)  There is evidence of vandalism at the employee's work site and security cannot be obtained for a modest cost nearby. 
(b)  On-call. An employee who is on-call after normal work hours is authorized to drive a vehicle home only if the employee does not anticipate reporting to his "normal" work-site when called to duty and if the vehicle: 
(1)  Has special equipment, is used to transport equipment which is too large or heavy, or has special features which make it impractical to be transferred between vehicles or between a vehicle and a fixed location; or 
(2)  Is required to be driven in sites or under conditions which would endanger a privately-owned vehicle. 
In addition, the number of employees in a department who are assigned to have on-call responsibilities each evening or weekend and are required to drive vehicles home will be kept to a minimum. Where employees can be used interchangeably for assigned functions and no clear-cut geographical assignments are necessary for the on-call work, such assignments should be rotated among the unit's employees so that only one or a few employees will be designated as on-call each evening. Only those employees actually on-call are authorized to drive county vehicles to and from their residence. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Sec. 2-129. - Documentation of vehicle assignments. 
The justification for each vehicle assignment, including those vehicles presently assigned by departments must be documented on Form MV-1. Justification for an employee to drive a vehicle home on a routine basis must also file Form MV-1. This form is to be resubmitted annually by each employee or the department head. The form is due to the office of the commission chairman by January 31 of the following year. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Sec. 2-130. - Marking of vehicles. 
All vehicles, unless otherwise authorized, will be marked, by having the county seal and some departmental designation placed on their front doors. The only vehicle which shall be exempt from having the county seal placed on it is the vehicle assigned to the chairman of the county commission. All vehicles will have affixed county government tags. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Sec. 2-131. - Record keeping and reporting. 
Each department will utilize the vehicle identification number unique to each vehicle and will maintain a file which will identify each vehicle it owns, contain proof of insurance, match each vehicle assigned to an employee with the assigned employee, provide initial and annual justification for the assignment in conformity with sections 2-127 and 2-128, provide initial and ongoing justification for any exceptions to the marking and tagging provisions of this policy memorandum, identify all county business miles driven and all personal miles driven, identify all commuting use, all maintenance records. Departments have the option of keeping all information in a file either in a central site or at the operating units. 
This section will apply to all vehicles covered by the policy with the exception that no information on vehicles used by sworn, POST-certified/registered law enforcement officers, performing undercover law enforcement activities such that knowledge of the identities of the officers or their vehicles could potentially be life-threatening, will be shared or maintained in an environment where access by another agency is possible. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Sec. 2-132. - Accounting for commuting use of vehicles for federal reporting. 
With the exception of certified law enforcement officers who carry firearms and use vehicles for bona fide arrests, all employees who drive vehicles to and from their residences, including agency heads, are considered by the Internal Revenue Code to have derived gross income from such use of their vehicles. The Internal Revenue Code permits most employees to value commuting use at $1.50 per one-way trip. Each employee is also permitted to value such use as a prorated portion of the lease value of his or her vehicle based on the ratio of personal miles driven to total miles driven. The Internal Revenue Code requires that such income be reported with other gross income on individuals' income tax returns, and that taxes and FICA be paid on such income. 
The Internal Revenue Code also requires that employees report the number of commuting trips they make to their employers, that the employers withhold associated taxes and FICA, that the employers report such income and withholdings on individual employees' W-2 forms, and that the employers remit to the Internal Revenue Service the employers' share of any owed FICA. 
Generally, trips between one's home and office are considered to be commuting. Exceptions are limited to those noted for employees maintaining their principal offices in their homes and for sworn law enforcement officers going officially on patrol when they leave their homes. 
Form MV-2 is intended to be used for employees' reporting; however, other methods can be used instead. An approved simplified method of compliance is for an agency to withhold taxes and FICA at a rate of $3.00 per day for a specific number of days per pay period for each employee who regularly commutes (for example, $24.00 per pay period assuming average commuting use of eight days per period). At the end of each calendar year, agencies should adjust their employer shares of FICA payments based on employees' reported actual commuting trips. Similarly, employees should report their actual number of commuting trips on their tax forms and either remit additional payments or claim refunds accordingly. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Secs. 2-133—2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Claim includes all claims presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means the members of the governing authority of the county, employees of the county, elected or appointed county officers and their appointees and employees, including appointed members of the various past, present and future commissions, councils, authorities, and boards, which have been created or will be created by the governing authority of this county. 
Proceeding includes any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state or any other state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 2-24-98) 
Sec. 2-142. - Construction. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to constitute any waiver, by the county or by any employee, of the governmental immunity afforded it under the constitution and laws of the state. The county and its employees specifically reserve the right to assert their immunity prior to the entry of judgment in any claim or proceeding, and section 2-145 shall not be applicable to require the county or any employee to pay any sums based on claims from which the county and its employees are immune. Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted in any way to reduce or eliminate the rights of any employee of the county against any other party. 
(Ord. of 2-24-98) 
Sec. 2-143. - Defense of employees. 
Whenever any claim is made or proceeding is brought against an employee, either against the employee asserting personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of duties or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local, the county shall, upon written request, provide for the employee's defense unless otherwise limited by the terms of this article. The provisions of this article shall not apply unless the employee provides notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to the chief executive within 30 days after the employee has notice of a claim and/or within five days after the employee has been served with process in a proceeding initiated against the employee. 
(Ord. of 2-24-98) 
Sec. 2-144. - Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(a)  The county may refuse to provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against any employee if it determines that any of the following exists: 
(b)  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of employment by the county. 
(1)  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption, malice or in bad faith. 
(2)  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution. 
(3)  Provisions of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in the best interest of the county. 
(4)  The employee acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, the employee's own self-indulgence substantially impaired the employee's judgment, (as, for example, an officer or employee who causes damage or injury while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs while on the job). 
(5)  The employee acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to advice of the county attorney or safety personnel. 
(6)  The employee acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a criminal act (as, for example, misappropriation of property or funds). 
(7)  The employee fails to cooperate in the defense of the claim or proceeding. 
(8)  The employee acted or failed to act in willful disregard of county policy or specific instructions of the employee's supervisor. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the county from providing a defense against a claim or proceeding where there is a conflict of interest between one (1) employee or group of employees of the county as compared with another employee or group of employees. 
(d)  The determinations required by subsection (a) of this section shall be made by the chairman of the board of commissioners upon the advice of the county attorney and/or department heads, and upon any internal investigation of the claim or proceeding. The county, acting through the chairman of the board of commissioners, may refuse, at any time prior to or after the approval or assumption of the defense, to provide for the defense of an employee if it is determined that any of the grounds for refusal set forth in this section exist. 
(e)  Upon approval of the defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall refer the matter to the county attorney for disposition. However, if two or more employees or groups of employees are involved, and the interest of one employee or group of employees conflicts with the interest of another employee or group of employees, the governing authority shall specify which employee or group of employees shall be represented by the county attorney and may authorize other employees or groups of employees to employ counsel at the expense of the county; provided, however, that the selection and compensation of such other counsel shall be subject to the prior approval of the board. 
(Ord. of 2-24-98) 
Sec. 2-145. - Payment of judgments, settlement of claims. 
(a)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is provided by this article, all final judgments awarded in courts of competent jurisdiction against the employee in proceedings to which this article applies or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this article shall be paid by the county as hereinafter provided. All compromises of claims or proceedings governed by this article shall be approved by the chairman of the board of commissioners upon recommendation of the comptroller and the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, payment of judgments and claims shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  No sum will be paid where the employee's liability is based on a discretionary act, and the county and the employee reserve the right to assert all governmental and sovereign immunity in defense of such claims. Payment of judgments and claims pursuant to this section shall be made only where liability is based upon a ministerial act of the employee. It is the intent of this section to provide for the payment of claims or judgments where the defense of sovereign or governmental immunity may not be asserted initially as a defense to the claim or proceeding. 
(2)  No sum will be paid on behalf of any employee in excess of $50,000.00, for any claim(s) or proceeding(s) arising from incident(s) or alleged wrongful acts. In the case of more than one employee being defended pursuant to this article for any claim(s) or proceeding(s) arising from the same, related and/or connected wrongful acts, no sum will be paid in excess of $200,000.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  No sum will be paid under the provisions of this article for punitive or exemplary damages. 
(4)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this article unless the claimant unconditionally releases the employee and the county from any and all claims, causes of action, whether arising out of the common law, state or federal statutes, or state or federal constitutional violations, or judgments arising out of the subject claim or proceeding. Further, no sum shall be paid under the provisions of this article if any attempt to recover or recovery of any sum whatsoever from the employees is made by the claimant or any party as a result of the claim or proceeding. 
(5)  There is excluded further from the operation of this article any claim or proceeding as to the extent that insurance is provided by the county. There is further excluded from the operation of this article any claim or proceeding as to which the county has, by resolution or otherwise, provided for the payment and defense of claims or proceedings as to the extent that insurance is provided by the county arising from the ownership, use or maintenance of county motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 2-24-98) 
Secs. 2-146—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FIXED ASSET POLICY AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-151. - Perpetual fixed asset inventory system. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Fixed assets. Used to describe land, buildings, furniture and fixtures, vehicles and equipment. The county further defines fixed assets as having a value of $5,000.00 or greater and having a useful life longer than one (1) year. 
Perpetual fixed asset inventory system. A constantly updated system reflecting additions and deletions to the county's fixed assets. 
(b)  Purpose. To establish a procedure by which all additions and deletions of fixed assets will be constantly updated thus providing county management with direct access throughout the year to reliable information on current fixed asset balances. 
(c)  Scope. This procedure will apply to all county department heads and is recommended for all county elected officials. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  All purchases meeting the above definition of fixed assets and are not appropriated and purchased against the capital fund, must be purchased against the general fund expense codes: 
a.  Expense code 415. All non-office equipment. 
b.  Expense code 600. Furniture and fixtures, computer equipment and other office equipment. 
(2)  The fixed asset custodian in the finance department will record all pertinent information in the computerized fixed asset system. This person will also notify each designated fixed asset custodian at the department level and arrange an agreed upon time for tagging of an asset. 
(3)  Each department has the responsibility to notify the finance department when an asset change occurs (e.g., asset is transferred, sold, retired, scrapped, traded in, etc.). The fixed asset custodian at the department level will record each change on the fixed asset activity form, and send form to the finance department. This form will authorize the finance department to record the change on the asset master file. 
(4)  At the end of each fiscal year, the staff accountant will make the appropriate journal entries to record the additions, transfers and deletions of the counties fixed assets. 
(Ord. of 2-9-99; Mo. of 12-21-04) 
Sec. 2-152. - Department level fixed asset custodian. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish a procedure whereby the responsibilities of a fixed asset custodian is assigned by the appropriate department head to serve at each facility within the county. The custodian would serve as a liaison with the finance department to identify, record and track fixed assets belonging to that facility. 
(b)  Scope. This procedure will apply to all county department heads and is recommended for all county elected officials. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  On a monthly to quarterly basis (depending on the quantity of new fixed asset items), the fixed asset custodian would be contacted by the finance department fixed asset accountant for the purpose of tagging new items of equipment. To facilitate this task, finance will forward a list of tagable items to the custodian to allow the custodian time to determine the locations of the equipment so as to accelerate the tagging process. The department fixed asset custodian will accompany the finance fixed asset custodian in tagging the identified items of equipment. If any item of equipment were not found, it would be the responsibility of the department custodian to determine the equipment's location so a fixed asset tag can later be applied. 
(2)  The departmental fixed asset custodian will be responsible for the filling out of the fixed asset activity form and returning the completed form to the finance department upon completion. This form should be completed in a timely manner so as to keep the accounting of such equipment current in the county's fixed asset system. 
(Ord. of 2-9-99) 
Sec. 2-153. - Real estate records. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish a procedure whereby all real estate records are routed to the county clerk's office when acquiring new land with copies to the finance department for official entry onto the county's books. 
(b)  Scope. This procedure applies to all Carroll County purchases of real estate. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  All closing requirements will be coordinated through the county attorney's office. The county attorney's office will identify and verify all documents needed for closing. 
(2)  Upon completion of the closing process the county attorney will gather all appropriate documents and send the originals to the county clerk's office with copies to the finance department. 
Required documents include: 
a.  Original warranty deed; 
b.  Copy of owner's affidavit; 
c.  Copy of settlement statement; 
d.  Title insurance form; 
e.  Legal description of property; and 
f.  Other documents as appropriate. 
(3)  The fixed asset custodian in the finance department will record all pertinent information in the computerized fixed asset system. 
(4)  After the property information is on the computer a separate folder will be set up for all the documents pertaining to the land purchase. 
(5)  If any departments making the land purchase receives any original documents pertaining to the purchase of land, please forward to the county clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 2-9-99) 
Sec. 2-154. - Physical inventories of fixed assets. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish a schedule of completing physical inventories of fixed assets for all county departments. 
(b)  Scope. This policy applies to all county departments which have fixed assets assigned to them. 
(c)  Policy. 
(1)  A complete physical inventory of fixed assets will be conducted every year. The finance department will send out, by December 15, each year, all departments asset lists. Lists will be updated and returned by January 10. 
(2)  Additionally, a department will be required to conduct an inventory any time there is a department head change. 
(3)  Additionally, the finance department will assist in completing an inventory any time a new facility begins operations. 
(4)  Additionally, a department will be required to complete an inventory when it moves from one location to another. 
(5)  Additionally, the finance department must inventory the surplus fixed assets before the county holds any auctions. 
(6)  Additionally, an inventory will be conducted any time a special request is made by management. 
(Ord. of 2-9-99) 
Sec. 2-155. - Fixed asset journal entries. 
(a)  Purpose. To establish a procedure whereby all fixed asset purchases are captured and recorded to the appropriate fixed asset account. 
(b)  Scope. This procedure applies to all finance department staff issuing P.O.s and making payments against any fixed asset account. 
(c)  Procedures. All copies of purchase orders and all payment invoices having the following charge numbers must be forwarded on to the finance department's staff accountant: 
(1)  General Fund Expense Code - 415; 
(2)  General Fund Expense Code - 600; and 
(3)  All Fund Five (Capital Fund) purchases. 
These copies will act as notification to the staff accountant for entries into the county's fixed asset accounts. 
(Ord. of 2-9-99) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of August 6, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-4, 6-31—6-45, 6-61—6-78, and adding a new ch. 6. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of December 12, 1995; and an ordinance of October 15, 2002. 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 6-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Carroll County Alcohol Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless context otherwise requires, the following terms are hereby defined: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Alcohol treatment facility means any facility in which treatment, counseling and other services are rendered for alcohol dependency. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "non-alcoholic" beer, which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia, also known as the board. 
County means Carroll County, Georgia. 
Day care facility means the use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children or adults, who do not reside on the property, for periods of less than 24 hours. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "day care center (19+)," "day care home," "family (6 or fewer)," and "day care home, group (7—18)," shall carry the state definitions for such operations. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Drug store means any store which sells primarily health care products and which has a pharmacy that supplies prescription medications. 
Employee permit means an authorization granted by the county to employees of a licensed retail consumption dealer to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. Additionally this permit authorizes employees of a retail dealer (liquor store, package store) to sell alcoholic beverages in that establishment. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Grocery store means a store which sells primarily food, and which has a produce department and a meat department. 
Hotel means a building(s) in which overnight accommodations, without separate cooking facilities are provided to the public. The term "hotel" includes the terms "motel" and "tourist court." 
Housing authority means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created under the State Housing Authorities Law. 
Indoor recreation facility (private) means an indoor area or establishment that offers various recreation or amusement. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any holder of a license issued under this chapter for the retail sale of beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits by the drink, who is a licensed caterer, who is otherwise qualified under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq., and who obtains a license to sell alcoholic beverages at authorized special events. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license for the sale or distribution of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine is issued under this chapter. In the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation are licensees. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Place of worship means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include, but are not limited to: schools, meeting halls, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, day care counseling, kitchens and outdoor meetings (including tent meetings). 
Restaurant means an establishment where meals or refreshments may be purchased by the general public for consumption on, or off its premises. 
Retail dealer means persons other than brewers, distillers or wholesale dealers who sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines irrespective of the quantities sold. 
School means a facility used for education or instruction in any branch or knowledge. 
Wholesale dealer means persons other than brewers who sell malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits to retail dealers for purposes of resale only. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-3—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TYPES OF LICENSES AND FEES 

Sec. 6-21. - License is a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the unincorporated area of the county under a license granted by the county upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state law. 
(c)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled and is subject to any further ordinances that may be enacted." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued in accord with this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, county licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-22. - Licenses, generally; expiration and application dates; transferability. 
All licenses issued under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Permit the licensee to sell or distribute the beverage for which the license is issued outside municipalities in the county, pursuant to the terms of this chapter and not inconsistent with the laws of the state and of the United States. 
(2)  Expire on December 31 of each year. Application for renewal shall be made annually on or before the thirtieth day of November. Any licensee making proper application, with supporting documents, for a license to operate during the following calendar year and having filed such application prior to November 30, shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval of such licensee's application for the following year if final approval is not granted prior to January 1. 
(3)  Not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without the prior approval of the zoning administrator upon written application. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-23. - Types of licenses and permits issued. 
Only the following licenses and or permits shall be issued under this chapter: 
(1)  Malt beverages, wholesale; 
(2)  Malt beverages, retail package; 
(3)  Malt beverages, by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(4)  Wine, wholesale; 
(5)  Wine, retail package; 
(6)  Wine, by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(7)  Distilled spirits, wholesale; 
(8)  Distilled spirits, by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(9)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer; 
(10)  Farm winery tasting room; 
(11)  Special event alcohol permit; 
(12)  Employee permit; 
(13)  Hotel-motel in room service permit. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-24. - Fees. 
(a)  There is an annual license fee for each type of license. In addition, there is an administrative fee to offset administrative and investigative costs which is charged with the initial application. The fees applicable to all license applications and renewal applications are as set forth in the county alcohol ordinances schedule of fees. Said fee schedule may be modified by the board of commissioners periodically as needed. 
(b)  Each type of license to be issued requires a separate application. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a certified check in the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check in the amount of the application fee to defray investigative and administrative costs. In the event a license is denied, the license fee will be refunded, but the application fee is non-refundable. 
(c)  Licenses are valid for one calendar year. If a license is issued prior to July 1 of the year, the full annual license fee shall be payable. If the license is issued July 1 or thereafter, only 50 percent of the license fee shall be payable. 
(d)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew the license shall file applications, with the requisite fee enumerated in this section, with the board of commissioners on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If the license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs will be assessed. 
(e)  In the event a license is issued and thereafter surrendered, revoked, suspended or transferred, no portion of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(f)  In the event an application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited for license fees will be refunded. Application fees will not be refunded. 
Alcohol Ordinance of Carroll County  Fee Schedule 
Malt beverages, wholesale ..... $2,000.00 
Malt beverages, retail package ..... 600.00 
Malt beverages, by the drink for consumption on premises ..... 900.00 
Wine, wholesale ..... 600.00 
Wine, retail package ..... 600.00 
Wine, by the drink for consumption on premises ..... 700.00 
Distilled spirits, wholesale ..... 3,500.00 
Distilled spirits, by the drink for consumption on premises ..... 4,500.00 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer ..... 250.00 
Farm winery ..... 100.00 
Special event alcohol permit, per day ..... 50.00 
Employee permit ..... 25.00 
Hotel-motel in room service permit ..... 300.00 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-25—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 90. 

Sec. 6-31. - Wholesale. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter that shall be paid to the board of commissioners on all distilled spirits and wine sold by wholesalers to retailers in the county. Such tax shall be paid to the designee of the board of commissioners by the wholesale distributors on all distilled spirits and wine sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits and wine in the county as follows: Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits or wine to any licensees hereunder, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received in the department of community development after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits and wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits or wine to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverages sold by wholesalers to retailers in the county at the rate of $0.22 per liter and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
All provisions as to excise tax in this section shall apply to this tax on beer and malt beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-32. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this article, and such licensee shall remit the same to the county on or before the twentieth day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the department of community development to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this article, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Excise taxes received in the department of community development after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, their designee will notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(d)  Any licensee who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00, and the license of such location may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-33. - Farm wineries. 
Farm winery licensees shall pay an excise tax at a rate of $0.22 per liter according to the process detailed in section 6-31 above (wine and distilled spirits). 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-34—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS—ALL LICENSES 

Sec. 6-41. - Applications. 
(1)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the department of community development. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, then the application for license shall be in the name of the individual and the license, if issued, shall be issued in that name. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, then the application shall be made in the name of the partnership; and if a license is issued, then the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership or in accord with section 6-44 hereof if section 6-44 applies. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, then the application shall be made in the name of the corporation; and if a license is issued, then the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation or in accord with section 6-44 hereof if section 6-44 applies. 
(5)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the department of community development to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(6)  The fingerprints provided shall be forwarded to the sheriff's office and/or the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, as well as the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to search for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(8)  An applicant for any type of license under this chapter, including an employee permit, must resolve any pending alcohol related criminal charges before his or her application will be considered. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-42. - Granting applications. 
Once an applicant has fully complied with and been approved by the department of community development, the appropriate license shall be granted. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-43. - Denial of an application. 
(a)  The department of community development shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the date of such denial. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-44. - Qualifications of licensees. 
(a)  Wholesale. Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute malt beverages, wines, or distilled spirits at wholesale. 
(b)  Retail package sales and consumption by the drink on the premises. In order to qualify for the issuance of a retail license, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. The applicant must not be less than 21 years of age. Applicants may choose to employ a registered agent for the administration of the license. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, then the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder (if an individual). If the majority stockholder is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership; or if no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership shall be licensed. 
(3)  If the applicant is a non-profit club, then the managing agent may be an officer of the organization rather than a full-time employee if such managing agent is qualified in accord with this section. 
(4)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless proper information establishes to the satisfaction of the department of community development or its designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, has been so convicted in the two years preceding the filing of the application. An applicant's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a county ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. If any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages, including sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, then the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled. 
(5)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within two years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any county employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the county. 
(7)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the county previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(8)  The department of community development may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(9)  Licensed establishments may choose to maintain in the county a registered agent as indicated in subsection (b)(1). The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the department of community development on such forms as the department of community development may prescribe. If a licensed establishment changes the registered agent during the year for which license is issued, then the registered agent assuming such responsibility in accord with the terms hereof shall meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(11)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license if the applicant lacks adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or if the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(12)  The department of community development may, in its discretion, consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If circumstances are such that granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety, welfare, and morals, then such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(13)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant was allowed to avail himself or herself of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-45. - Measurement of distance. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term, "school," or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or place of worship school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools, universities and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. 20-2-690(b). The terms "school" and "educational building" include only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "college" shall mean an educational institution authorized by the state to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
(b)  The term "place of worship" means a building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include, but are not limited to: schools, meeting halls, indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, day care counseling, kitchens and outdoor meetings (including tent meetings). 
(c)  The requirements for minimum distance from a place of worship or college located in a shopping center, as defined by the latest Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (copyright 2004 by Rutgers), shall not apply to any new license for retail package or retail consumption. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the main entrance of the establishment from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line, regardless of obstructions, to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the main entrance of the church building, or to the nearest portion of the school grounds or college campus. 
(e)  No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of this chapter shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of said location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(f)  As to any licensed location, if the distance requirements in this section are or were met at the time of the issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a place of worship, day care facility, alcohol treatment facility, school, educational building or college within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-46. - Transferability of license/change in ownership. 
(a)  Individuals. In the event of a change of ownership of a business for which an individual has been issued a license, the new owner, if desiring a license, must meet the qualifications specified in section 6-44 and must file an application as provided in section 6-41 and tender with the application the investigative and administrative fee as provided in section 6-24 and any license fee that may be due. 
(b)  Partnerships or corporations. In the event of a change of any ownership interest in a business which is owned or operated by a partnership or corporation and for which a license has been issued, the licensee shall report such change to the department of community development in writing within five days. "Change of ownership interest" as used herein includes, but is not limited to, any change in: 
(1)  Division of profits and/or losses; 
(2)  Division of net gross or sales; 
(3)  Method of paying or amount of rent paid; 
(4)  Ownership of leased premises, or buildings or land used in the business; 
(5)  Members of a partnership; 
(6)  Stockholders of corporate stock; and 
(7)  Management. 
(c)  If, as a result of any change of ownership interest, the licensee would not qualify under other provisions of this chapter for the issuance of a license, then the license issued to the licensee shall be subject to revocation and shall not be subject to renewal. 
(d)  All applications for transfer of a license shall be accompanied by the transfer fee, together with an investigative and administrative fee. If the transfer is not approved, then the transfer fee will be refunded, but the investigative and administrative fee will not be refunded. 
(e)  Upon the death of a licensee, the executor or administrator of the licensee's estate may continue to operate under the license for the balance of the calendar year without payment of any additional fee or may delegate the operation of the business to another person if the person operating under the license, whether the executor, administrator, or delegate, would otherwise be qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-47. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only so long as the licensee is actually engaged in the permitted sale of alcoholic beverages. Any holder of any license under this chapter who shall for a period of 30 days after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall, after the thirty-day period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(b)  In the event a license is conditionally issued for a location upon which the licensee intends to build an appropriate building or renovate an existing structure, the licensee will be determined to have ceased doing business if necessary permits are not obtained and work completed within two (2) years of the date the license is approved. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-48. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter upon the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this chapter; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-49. - Display of license. 
The county alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-50. - Advertising. 
Licensees may use window signs to advertise products for sale within the store, so long as said signs comply with the county sign ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-51. - Sale or Possession for Sale without License or Beyond Boundaries of Premises Covered by License; Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage if the person does not have a license granted by the county to sell, distribute, or possess for sale the alcoholic beverages or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-52. - Penalties for violation of ordinance. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment in accord with the limits established in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-53. - Requirement to properly check identification. 
In any case where a reasonable person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person seeking to obtain alcoholic beverages is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing said alcoholic beverages or wine to comply with the provisions of applicable state law concerning the purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-54. - Prohibited sales. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Knowingly sell or offer to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines to any person under the age of 21 years. In any case where a reasonable person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person seeking to obtain distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing said malt beverages or wine to request and be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person. Failure to make such a request and to verify the purchaser's age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether any sale to an underage person was made knowingly. "Proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth. "Proper identification" includes, but is not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or a state issued identification card. 
(2)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(4)  Individual employees who violate this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 6-51 of this chapter. Penalties for license holders shall be determined by the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  As to the penalties in subsection (4), if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishments' owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessor(s) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-55. - Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-56. - Regulations. 
The board of commissioners shall have the authority to supplement any section of this chapter from time to time and reserves the right to promulgate appropriate regulations for such implementation. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-57. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension of a license issued under this chapter for such period of time as the department of community development shall, in its sole discretion, determine appropriate: 
(1)  A violation by the licensee of any state or federal law or regulation, or any provision of this chapter or the regulations promulgated under its authority; 
(2)  The failure of the licensee and employees or agents of the licensee to promptly report to the sheriff's office any violation of law/breach of peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring on or near the licensee's premises; 
(3)  The violation of any law, regulation or ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines, by any employee or agent of the licensee in connection with the operation of the business of the licensee; 
(4)  Operation of the business of the licensee in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, or in a manner contrary to public welfare, safety, health or morals; 
(5)  Failure to furnish the department of community development on request any information or records that would be necessary for use in determining the licensee's compliance and qualifications under this chapter; or 
(6)  To knowingly sell malt beverages, wines or distilled spirits to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(7)  To knowingly sell or offer to sell malt beverages or wines or distilled spirits to any person under the age of 21 years. In any case where a reasonable person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person seeking to obtain an alcoholic beverage is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing said malt beverages or wine to request and be furnished with proper identification in order to verify the age of such person. Failure to make such a request and to verify the purchaser's age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether any sale to an underage person was made knowingly. "Proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth. "Proper identification" includes, but is not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or a state issued identification card. 
(b)  Wherever this chapter permits the department of community development to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the board of commissioners. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
f.  The licensee's history of compliance or non-compliance with applicable alcohol related laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-58. - Revocation or non-renewal of license. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall revoke the license of any licensee: 
(1)  Whose license has been suspended two or more times in any consecutive 12-month period; 
(2)  For any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension; 
(3)  Who is convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; 
(b)  The board of commissioners may revoke any license issued under this chapter, or refuse to issue the same, if the licensee or applicant for renewal: 
(1)  Makes any false statement of a material fact on the application for license or renewal thereof, or on any document required to be filed with the department of community development; 
(2)  Fails to timely give written notice of any change of ownership interest as required in section 6-45; 
(3)  Violates any rules or regulations promulgated by the board of commissioners under this chapter, of which the licensee has reasonable notice; 
(4)  Becomes disqualified under this chapter to hold a license. 
(5)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this chapter no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the county; 
(6)  Has received a license conditioned upon the construction or renovation of the facility and has not obtained necessary permits and completed construction within two (2) years of the date said license was approved. 
(7)  Violates any provisions of this chapter. 
(8)  Violates any state law related to the sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits, including but not limited to sales to underage persons or sales to visibly intoxicated persons. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-59. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  The department of community development shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of its intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall be hand delivered or sent certified mail to the applicant at the address shown on the application, and the applicant shall be directed to show cause, if any, why the proposed action should not be taken by the department of community development. the notice shall: 
(1)  Advise of the time and place specified for the hearing, which shall be conducted at the earliest possible meeting date of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Shall set forth in reasonable detail the grounds for such action and the factual basis supporting those grounds; 
(3)  Advise the applicant or licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses or arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing; and 
(4)  Advise the applicant or licensee that failure to appear at the scheduled hearing will result in the intended action being taken by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  After the hearing, a written decision shall be entered and provided to the applicant or licensee. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-60. - Penalties. 
The board of commissioners shall set forth all penalties for violations of this article in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-61—6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINES 

Sec. 6-71. - Hours of operation, sales on election and Christmas Day. 
(a)  The hours of operation of retail licensees for the sale of package malt beverages and wines shall be allowed daily (Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.). Wholesale licensees may deliver to licensed retailers as needed. 
(b)  The wholesale and retail sale of wine and malt beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election provided. 
(c)  The wholesale and retail sale of wine and malt beverages shall be lawful on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1; Res. of 2-6-18(2)) 
Sec. 6-72. - Age of employees. 
No licensee shall allow or require a person in his employment who is under the age of 18 years to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any malt beverages or wines. This restriction does not apply to persons under the age of 18 years employed in grocery stores or drugstores who are selling said beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-73—6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ALCOHOL BY THE DRINK—GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6-81. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this chapter without the consent of the person's legal guardian. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-82. - Regulations as to employees and managers. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been cleared by the sheriff's office or designee indicating that the person is eligible for such employment. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy(s), cook(s), or dishwasher(s). 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the sheriff's office or such department's designee and upon payment of a fee that shall be established by the board of commissioners and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. Applications must be accompanied by a valid government issued identification card (for example a driver's license or state issued I.D. card). 
(4)  The sheriff or his designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any criminal record of the applicant. If there is no record of a disqualifying charge or of violation of this chapter, the sheriff's office or his designee shall issue a permit to the person stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the sheriff or his designee shall notify the person, in writing, that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(5)  No person shall be granted an employee permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the sheriff's office or his designee that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of two years of the date of application and has been released from parole or probation. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an employee permit. No person shall be granted an employee permit who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within two years of the date of application and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense where the conviction or plea was entered pursuant to the Georgia First Offender Act, as amended, so long as the first offender status has not been revoked. 
(6)  An employee permit shall be issued for a period of one (1) calendar year from the date of the original application. Employee permits are issued for work at the specific licensed establishment as indicated on the employee permit application and may not be used at another licensed establishment. As noted in subsection (11) below, the employee permit must be in the possession of the employee or the employer while the employee is working at the licensed establishment. This permit must be available for inspection by members of the sheriff's office or the department of community development staff. 
(7)  No person shall be issued an employee permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the sheriff's office for an employee permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then 30 calendar days must elapse from the date of notification per certified mailing before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(8)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the sheriff's office or his designee or the department of community development. 
(9)  Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for employee permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(10)  All permits issued under this chapter remain the property of county and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand by the sheriff's office or the department of community development. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid county employee permit. Employee permits may be kept on the premises, or on the person of the employee. For new employees, a receipt issued by the sheriff's office may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the sheriff's office or his designee the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the months of June and December. List shall be delivered to the sheriff's office or his designee no later than the last day of each said month. 
(13)  Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall receive a minimum fine of $500.00 per violation. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-83. - Open area and patio sales. 
Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the department of community development. These areas must also meet the requirements of the county's development and fire codes. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-84. - No consumption outside premises. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages except as permitted pursuant to sections 6-85 and 6-86 of this chapter, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption on a golf course or the sale of wine or malt beverages outside on a golf course to golfers. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-85. - Partially consumed bottles of wine purchased with a meal. 
(a)  Any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. 
(b)  A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. 
(c)  The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(d)  If transporting in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-86. - Bring your own bottle. 
Brown bagging wine, malt beverages and distilled spirits shall be prohibited. All regulations as to prohibited sales as defined in section 6-53 of this chapter shall apply to this section. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-87. - Specification of premises. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the county, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-88. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealers licensed under this chapter shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself/himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment or to an agent or manager to solicit for herself/himself or for the others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the beverage. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-89. - Audits of licenses. 
(a)  The department of community development may conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, after notice to the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license(s) issued under this chapter. 
(b)  All licensed establishments shall maintain the following records for a three-year period and make such records available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099s. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may waive all or some of the requirements of subsection (b) upon a determination that no such records exist and that the licensee cannot practically maintain such records based on the net income of the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-90. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-91. - Poured alcohol to be transported only by employees. 
Poured alcoholic beverages shall be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. Permitted employees are those who have applied for and received an employee pouring license authorizing such employees to take orders and transport alcoholic beverages to customers. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-92. - Inspections. 
Sworn officers of the sheriff's office shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the county during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-93. - Establishment may be closed in cases of emergency. 
The sheriff's office may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-94. - Compliance with existing adult entertainment ordinance. 
In accordance with county adult entertainment ordinance, no alcohol license may be issued to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-95. - Happy hour—Promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time; 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; or 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The sheriff's office and the department of community development shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately, and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(h)  Any person deemed guilty of violating this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days in the common jail of the county. Licensees may further be subject to revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-96—6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 6-111. - Locations where permitted. 
No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in a site that is zoned commercial, industrial or planned unit development and: 
(1)  Has certified "Resort Status" as defined by applicable Georgia State law; 
(2)  That is an eating establishment regularly serving prepared food with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department. Such restaurant will regularly serve food every hour the restaurant is open and shall derive at least 50 percent of the establishment's total annual gross sales from food; 
(3)  That is an indoor commercial recreation establishment regularly serving prepared food with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department. Such establishment will regularly serve food every hour the eating establishment is open and shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities; or 
(4)  That is an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department; prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. When eating establishments are located in hotels or motels, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-112. - Hours and days of sale. 

 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-113. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell or distribute any distilled spirit by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-114—6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 6-121. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except in sites in areas zoned commercial, industrial and planned unit development and which are being used as one of the following: 
(1)  Eating establishments regularly serving prepared food with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department. Such restaurant will regularly serve food every hour the Restaurant is open and shall derive at least 50 percent of the establishment's total annual gross sales from food; 
(2)  Indoor commercial recreation establishments regularly serving prepared food with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department. Such establishment will regularly serve food every hour the restaurant is open and shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenue from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities; 
(3)  Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural centers capable of serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the environmental health department; prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. When eating establishments are located in hotels or motels, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure; or 
(4)  At a golf course that derives at least 50 percent of its annual gross revenue from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities, i.e. golf. These eating establishments must be located in a zoning district which permits restaurants and drive-in restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-122. - Hours and days of sale. 

 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-123—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CATERING 

Sec. 6-131. - Requirements. 
Requirements for a "licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" license: 
(1)  Eating establishments, indoor commercial recreation establishments, and permitted special event venue operators located in unincorporated Carroll County and that hold an alcohol by the drink license in accordance with articles VII, VIII, and IX of this chapter are the only establishments authorized to cater in the unincorporated areas of Carroll County. Such restaurants and indoor commercial recreation establishments must also comply with all provisions of this article. 
(2)  The applicant shall hold a valid state license to sell malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits or some combination thereof by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  The applicant shall hold a valid local county license to sell malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits, or some combination thereof, by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  The applicant must be a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
(5)  The applicant must hold all required food service permits required by the county environmental health office. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-132. - Application. 
An applicant for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer license must: 
(1)  Submit a completed application provided by the county. 
(2)  Pay the required application and license fees. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer licenses are valid for one calendar year. They are issued and must be renewed in the same manner as their corresponding retail licenses. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-133. - Permitted activities. 
Only a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages off premises. Licensed alcoholic beverage caterers are authorized to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  The distribution of alcoholic beverages is in connection with an "authorized catered event" for which a "special event alcohol permit" has been granted authorizing said event. The requirements for "special event alcohol permits" are detailed in article XI of this chapter. 
(2)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that type of alcoholic beverage authorized by the caterer's local alcoholic beverage license. 
(3)  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-11-4 et seq. 
(4)  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer complies with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
(5)  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer complies with the requirements contained in articles II through IV and section 6-81 and 6-83 of article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-134. - Restaurants. 
Eating establishments which hold an alcohol by the drink license in accordance with articles VII, VIII and or IX of this chapter may cater events within the unincorporated areas of Carroll County so long as said establishments comply with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-135. - Exceptions. 
For events where alcoholic beverages are furnished by the host, which are not open to the public and at which no admittance fee, cup fee, or by the drink fee is required, the event holder shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. However, if alcoholic beverages are to be provided at such an event by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, then the requirements of this chapter must be met. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-136—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRIVATE CLUBS 

Sec. 6-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  A suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-152. - Regulation or sale of alcoholic beverages. 
A private club may seek a license for retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in accord with this chapter. Licensed private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-153. - Certain organization exempt from food establishment requirements. 
Veteran's organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-154. - Investigative and administrative costs. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check in the amount of the investigative/administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded; but the cost paid for investigative and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-155. - Hours and days of sale. 

 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-156—6-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS 

Sec. 6-171. - Eligibility for a temporary special event alcohol permit. 
(a)  A temporary special event alcohol permit may be issued to any person, firm or corporation for an approved special event. The person, firm or corporation must make application and pay the fee that may be required by this chapter and shall be required to comply with all the general provisions of this chapter and the licensing and regulations for consumption on the premises establishment with the exception of the full service kitchen requirement. 
(b)  Special event alcohol permits shall be obtained for the following: 
(1)  Events catered pursuant to the regulations established in article IX of this chapter. 
(2)  The special event must meet the following criteria before the issuance of a permit to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  The special event must receive approval from the sheriff's office on crowd control and security measures. 
(4)  The special event must receive approval from the sheriff's office, on traffic control measures. 
(c)  The premises where the special event shall occur shall meet the distance from certain uses requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Any employee or volunteer of the special event permit holder, working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages shall be required to obtain an employee permit for the special event. Employees or volunteers dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages must be 18 years of age or older. Employees of caterers must comply with the regulations established in article X of this chapter and must be 21 years of age or older as pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-4. 
(e)  The sheriff's office or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary permit for a special event if continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(f)  As a condition on the issuance of a temporary special event permit, the permit holder shall indemnify and hold the county harmless from claims, demand or cause of action that may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(g)  The director of community development shall issue the temporary special event permit to the applicant upon compliance with the terms hereof. 
(h)  In the event that a special event alcohol permit is denied by the director of community development, the applicant may appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-172. - Bona fide nonprofit civic organizations. 
(a)  A bona fide non-profit civic organization is one which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions subsections (c), (d) or (e) of 26 U.S.C. § 501. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application and the payment of a special temporary event permit application fee, a bona fide non-profit civic organization may obtain a permit authorizing the organization to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or to sell wine at retail for off-premises consumption, or both, for a period not to exceed three days, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(c)  No more than 12 permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year. 
(d)  Permits are valid only for the location specified in the permit. No permit may be issued unless the sale of alcoholic beverages is lawful in the place for which the permit is issued. Said permit is subject to the restrictions set forth in section 6-171 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-173—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - HOTEL IN-ROOM SERVICE 

Sec. 6-181. - License. 
(a)  In-room service means the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom that contains beer and/or wine only, which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the beer and/or wine contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(b)  Any hotel-motel that acquires this in-room service must also obtain consumption on the premises license and shall meet requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee set forth in the county alcohol fees schedule shall be imposed to provide only beer and/or wine by "in-room service." 
(d)  The sale of beer and/or wine by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Secs. 6-182—6-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FARM WINERIES 

Sec. 6-191. - Definitions. 
Farm winery. As used in this chapter, the term "farm winery" means a domestic winery located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or domestic winery that makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from locally grown agricultural produce. 
Tasting room off premise. The term "tasting room off premise" shall mean an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premise and for the sale in closed packages for sale off the premise. Such outlets may only sell farm wines and no other commercially branded alcohol. Such outlets shall be located in a zoning district which allows retail sales. 
Tasting room on premise. The term "tasting room" shall mean an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine may be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-192. - Permitted sales. 
A farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other winery licensee at retail in a tasting room or other facility on the premises of the winery for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Additionally, a farm winery may sell its wine and the wine of any other winery licensee at retail for consumption on the premises and in closed packages for consumption off the premises in tasting rooms at a location within the county. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-193. - Licensee qualifications. 
The qualifications for the license for sale by farm winery tasting room shall be the same as set forth in section 6-194 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-194. - Applicable provisions. 
The following provisions of this chapter regarding qualifications of the licensee and other matters shall apply to the issuance of the license for sale by a farm winery tasting room and the operation thereof: 
Article I, section 6-2, Definitions; 
Article IV, General provisions—All licenses; 
Article VI, Package sales of malt beverages and wines; 
Article VII, Alcohol by the drink—General provisions. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-195. - License fees. 
The applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine and operation of a farm winery tasting room shall pay the license fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-196. - Licensing limitations. 
The license created in accord with this article shall be limited to farm winery tasting rooms licensed by the State of Georgia in accord with O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, et seq., and the licensee shall be permitted to perform only acts allowed in accord with such statutes. No license is hereby created authorizing any other use. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Sec. 6-197. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Feb. 6, 2018, repealed § 6-197, which pertained to Sunday sales and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 6, 2013. 
Sec. 6-198. - Hours of sale. 
Wine may be sold or distributed in a tasting room or other licensed farm winery at the following days and times: 

 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1; Res. of 2-6-18(1)) 
Secs. 6-199—6-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTES 

Sec. 6-211. - Incorporation of other statues. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts and incorporates within this chapter the following provisions of the Official Code of Georgia, which provisions are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference thereto: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40, Definitions. 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41, Performance of actual or simulated sexual acts. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42, Employee solicitation of patrons of drinks on premises. 
(4)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-43, Permitting persons to view sexually related acts or conduct performed on other premises. 
(5)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-44, Permitting persons to remove alcoholic beverages to other premises to view sexually related conduct or activities. 
(6)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-45, Employment of or assistance to persons engaged in sexually related conduct or activity or nudity. 
(7)  O.C.G.A. § 3-3-46, Grounds for suspension and revocation of alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 8-6-13, § 1) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; 
(2)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Good moral character. A person of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged of with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including but not limited to adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 1) 
Sec. 10-28. - Violation, penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as provided in section 10-13. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 26) 
Secs. 10-29—10-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 10-41. - Required; does not condone illegal activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the county any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in this article, without a permit to do so. 
(b)  No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 5) 
Sec. 10-42. - Operation of premises without permit unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 6) 
Sec. 10-43. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
No permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 14(a)) 
Sec. 10-44. - Issuance based on need. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new permits shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 14(b)) 
Sec. 10-45. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under permit, has had such permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the sheriff's department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, any partners, any and all officers, any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding and directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony, involving moral turpitude in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The county shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The permitting officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to receive permit. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and if applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 11) 
Sec. 10-46. - Applicant to appear for submission of application. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the county commissioners and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 10-45. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 12) 
Sec. 10-47. - Investigation, granting of permit. 
The county shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the board of commissioners may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this article, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned in this article, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this article openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required this article commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted under this article. 
(12)  That the grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the county, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 13) 
Sec. 10-48. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the county following investigation of the applicant deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the code and ordinance enforcement officer of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the code and enforcement office. The code and enforcement officer shall within ten days notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 15) 
Sec. 10-49. - Renewal; fee. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The application fee and renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permit shall be established at $5,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 16; Ord. of 8-12-97) 
Sec. 10-50. - Transfer. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 17) 
Sec. 10-51. - Change of location, name or size of establishment. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the code and ordinance enforcement office. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the county codes, have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension of expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 18) 
Sec. 10-52. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for board action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the commission agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, §§ 19, 20) 
Sec. 10-53. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefor, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(b)  Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  Rules of evidence inapplicable. The board of commissioners and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(d)  Hearing officer's report. The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk. 
(e)  Meeting. The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(f)  Action by commission. The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board of commissioners does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specified points. In either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, §§ 21—25) 
Secs. 10-54—10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-71. - Erotic dance establishments. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment permittee shall file a verified report with the permit officer showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment permittee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the permittee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all permits required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment holding permits pursuant to this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 3) 
Sec. 10-72. - Exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 4) 
Sec. 10-73. - Minors. 
(a)  Admission. It shall be unlawful for a permittee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a premises holding a permit. 
(b)  Sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, §§ 7, 8) 
Sec. 10-74. - Establishment location. 
(a)  No establishment permitted pursuant to this article shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined pursuant to this article is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; or 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 9) 
Sec. 10-75. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the premises holding a permit. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a premises holding a permit, he shall file a notice with the code and ordinance enforcement office of his intended employment on forms supplied by the code and ordinance enforcement office and shall receive approval of such employment from the code and ordinance enforcement office. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the code and ordinance enforcement officer requires, including a set of fingerprints. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the premises holding a permit. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, appeal the decision of the code and ordinance enforcement office to the board of commissioners, who may issue such order as is proper. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, and a receipt of the code and ordinance enforcement office evidencing the payment of such fee must be submitted at the time the notice of appeal is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the county or the laws and regulations of the state shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be issued permits as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 10) 
Sec. 10-76. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action pursuant to this article, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 27) 
Sec. 10-77. - Cleaning of premises. 
Each premises holding a permit shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises holding a permit. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the premises holding a permit to meet this requirement and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire premises holding a permit. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises holding a permit but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 28) 
Sec. 10-78. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The permittee premises, or his designated representative, shall make sanitary inspections of the premises holding a permit at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the officer issuing permits. Each premises holding a permit shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 29) 
Sec. 10-79. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A premises holding a permit, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the officer issuing permits on his findings of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the officer issuing permits shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the premises holding a permit, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the officer issuing permits may physically seal that portion of the premises holding a permit causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the officer issuing permit. The officer issuing permits shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 30) 
Sec. 10-80. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A premises holding a permit, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-91, § 31) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 

Sec. 14-26. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The Responsible Dog Ownership Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. is by this reference incorporated in this section and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-5-15, § 1) 
Secs. 14-27—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal. An animal shall be considered abandoned under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any animal placed upon public property or within a public building and left unattended or uncared for; 
(2)  Any animal placed upon private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant and left unattended or uncared for; or 
(3)  Any animal left on the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for more than 36 hours unattended and without food and water. 
Animal means any type of domestic or exotic animal or fowl including, but not limited to, dogs and cats. 
Animal control department or department means the department responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
(4)  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; 
(5)  Chases vehicles; 
(6)  Attacks other animals; or 
(7)  Runs uncontrolled. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law. 
At large. An animal is considered at large when it is not under control as provided in this article. 
Auctions means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this article. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as defined in this article. 
Cruelty means any act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
Humane manner means care of an animal including, but not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
Owner means any person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal, including, but not limited to, the caretaker or custodian of any animal or person harboring or having control of an animal. An animal is deemed in a person's possession if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Spayed or neutered means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Tethering. An animal may be restrained using a tethering device in which the chain or tether must be attached to both the animal and the anchor using a swivel or similar devices that prevent the chain or tether from becoming entangled or twisted. The chain or tether must be attached to a well-fitted collar or harness. The chain or tether cannot be used without a well-fitting collar or harness. The chain or tether must be at least four times the body length of the animal measured from the tip of the nose to the base of its tail. 
Under control. Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined to the premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner when away from the premises of the owner. 
Veterinary clinic or hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more documented, provoked or unprovoked attacks or threats of attack of such severity as to cause property damage, physical injury or significant mental trauma to the victim. Animal attacks on persons or other animals shall be documented by reporting such attacks to the county animal control office. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-3; Ord. of 5-5-15, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-52. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to make animal owners responsible and accountable for the actions, behavior and conditions of their animals. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal, state or municipal law. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, §§ 3-1-1, 3-1-2) 
Sec. 14-53. - Animal control. 
(a)  Generally. An animal owners' premises shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or enclosures in which animals are confined or maintained shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition so they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of the premises. The animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that they shall not disturb such persons by making noise. An animal may be restrained by using a tethering device as defined in section 15-51 but such tethering area must also be maintained in a proper clean and sanitary condition and the tethered animal must have access to adequate food, water and shelter while on such tether. 
(b)  Livestock or fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control or possess any pasture or enclosure for livestock or fowl in any fashion not authorized by the zoning ordinance of the county. 
(c)  Restraint. 
(1)  Generally. An animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a way as to prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person, without the permission of that person. An animal may leave the property of the animal owner when accompanied by the animal owner, but the animal owner must have the animal on a leash and must prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person without the permission of that person, or from attacking, threatening or harassing other persons. 
(2)  Dogs and cats. An owner of a dog, cat, or any animal shall restrain the animal in such a manner, whether by leash, fence or other appropriate enclosure (fence, pen, etc.), which will ensure that the animal is contained within the boundaries of the property owned or leased by the owner of the animal. In all residentially zoned districts (including subdivisions and mobile home parks and/or subdivisions) dogs, cats or any other animal shall be actively restrained as provided for in this article in order to prevent their leaving the property of their owner, unless the animal is under the direct supervision and control of the owner of the animal or his designee. 
(3)  Attack prevention. An animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from attacking, threatening or harassing any person on the public right-of-way of the roads, streets, highways and sidewalks in the county. 
(d)  Vicious or dangerous animals. Any owner of a vicious animal shall confine it within a building or secure enclosure and not release it unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint. Any vicious animal not secured as provided in this article is declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article and/or confined by the department for a period of 30 days. If an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any vicious animal for any violation of this article, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that the animal be humanely destroyed. 
(e)  Hunting dogs. Hunting dogs in the custody of persons hunting in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules and regulations are exempt from the mandates of this section. The owners of such dogs shall be civilly liable for any damage occasioned by the actions of their dogs. 
(f)  Animals in heat. Any owner or custodian shall confine any dog or cat in heat. 
(g)  Animals at large. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs, dogs, cats or any other type of animal, livestock, or other fowl within the county to permit them to run at large or to be a menace or nuisance to that person's neighbors or the public in general. In regard to poultry and/or fowl as referenced in this subsection, same shall be confined in an enclosure, housing or pen of some sort to the extent possible. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-4; Ord. of 5-5-15, § 1) 
Sec. 14-54. - Impoundment. 
Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three days, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If within that time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this article, the animal shall become the absolute property of the department, which may convey ownership of the animal to any responsible person or any conditions that the department may prescribe, or the department may humanely destroy the animal. 
(2)  An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound the animal. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against the department or its officers, agents or employees with respect to actions contemplated in this section. 
(3)  The department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any animal impounded in the animal shelter that the animal has been impounded, the manner by which the animal may be reclaimed, and that the animal shall become the property of the department as provided in this section. 
(4)  Following the impoundment of an animal found at large which has on its owner's address, and prior to its destruction the department shall use reasonable care to give the owner five days' notice of the proposed destruction. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may refuse to release any animal impounded in the animal shelter for rabies, contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution for any time period as the department may determine. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the department reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease, injury or overcrowding in the animal shelter, or to prevent the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals or any other condition. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes the animal has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death. 
(8)  The department may set all appropriate fees pertaining to the care and impoundment of animals. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-5(a)) 
Sec. 14-55. - Rabies. 
(a)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the state department of human resources and the department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or any other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to impound the animal in the facility of a competent veterinarian within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for any period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether or not the animal is infected with rabies. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-5(b) 
Sec. 14-56. - Adoption. 
The department may convey ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the department to a responsible person subject to conditions prescribed by the department, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of an adoption fee to be set by the department and any vaccination, licensing or veterinary costs; 
(2)  Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other disease administered; and 
(3)  Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-5(c)) 
Sec. 14-57. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either by act or omission, to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with proper food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to shelter to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times; 
(5)  Intentionally poison any animal; 
(6)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; 
(7)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions; or 
(8)  Knowingly or willingly permit or aid in the release of any animal on any property with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-6) 
Sec. 14-58. - Vaccination. 
(a)  All animal owners within the county shall have their animals over three months of age, including both dogs and cats, inoculated for the prevention of rabies. 
(b)  The department may adopt any other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
(c)  All regulations of the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated in this article by reference as though fully set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-7) 
Sec. 14-59. - Animal establishments. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  Required. No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the department, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in violation of any provision of this article. 
(2)  Term. The license period shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and shall run for one year. Renewal application for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after January 1 of each year. Application for a permit for a new establishment under the provisions of this article shall be made within 60 days of the start of business or operation. 
(3)  Separate permit required. Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise, requiring an individual permit (e.g., two kennels at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two animal establishments). 
(4)  Display. Permits obtained in accordance with this article shall be displayed in a prominent location on the premises of the animal establishment. 
(b)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Each animal establishment shall file an annual permit application with the department within the time periods provided by this article, provided that all preexisting establishments shall have 90 days from November 28, 1995, to file an application. 
(2)  The permit application shall be made on a form provided by and available from the department. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the department shall make an inspection of the facility to ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the establishment is in compliance with all provisions of this article. The department shall be permitted to make the inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours. A $40.00 nonrefundable inspection fee shall be paid directly to the department prior to the inspection. 
(4)  The department shall either issue or decline to issue a permit to the applicant. If a permit is not granted, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. 
(5)  Any animal establishment denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least ten days. Each reapplication shall describe any previous denial or revocation. A nonrefundable fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the department for reinspection prior to each reinspection. 
(6)  If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on any application, the department may refuse to issue or is entitled to revoke any permit. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  The department may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this article, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this section. 
(2)  Whenever a permit is revoked for cause, or pending any proceedings to contest such action, the department shall have power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals from the premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. If any owner shall fail to remove the animals as directed, the department may impound the animals pursuant to the impoundment provisions of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited conduct. Any animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any animal over three months of age unless the animal has been vaccinated as required by this article. 
(e)  Inspection. The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where the animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(f)  Standards. 
(1)  All animal establishments shall, in addition to the other requirements of this article, comply with the minimum standards of this subsection. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a permit. Standards for animal establishments are as follows: 
a.  Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfection. 
b.  Building temperatures shall be maintained at a comfortable level to ensure adequate ventilation. 
c.  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages. 
d.  Cages are to be of a material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
e.  Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. 
f.  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. 
g.  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
h.  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
i.  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(2)  All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall, in addition to the other requirements of this article, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
a.  Hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees shall be available for washing and disinfection. Cold water shall be easily accessible in all parts of the shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
b.  The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthy for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
c.  All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to the animal's full length. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-8) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Sec. 14-60. - Interference with duties of department; right of entry onto property and into vehicles; equipment. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the department or any other officer in the performance of its duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the department, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  The animal control officers, sheriff's deputies and other enforcement officers of the county are authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this article, including but not limited to an animal that has bitten a person within ten days. 
(c)  The department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 13. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this article. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the department or its officers for this action. 
(d)  The animal department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, humane wire box traps; and the department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-9) 
Sec. 14-61. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Any dead animal shall be properly disposed of by its owner, either by proper burial or by taking said animal to any place authorized by law to dispose of same within 24 hours after the discovery of the animal by its owner. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-10) 
Sec. 14-62. - Enforcement; jurisdiction; summons. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the department, the county sheriff's department and the county codes enforcement office. 
(b)  Persons in violation of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the state court or magistrate's court of the county. 
(c)  Representatives of the department and officers of the county sheriff's department are authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this article. The summons shall be in a form approved by the county magistrate court, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the county magistrate court on a date certain to answer all charges therein. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-11) 
Sec. 14-63. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of the department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-13) 
Sec. 14-64. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13, and/or perform public service work not to exceed 100 hours (work to be performed at the animal shelter), or any combination thereof. If such violation is continued each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-28-95, § 3-1-12) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; natural resources, ch. 62; roads and bridges, ch. 74; signs, ch. 78; solid waste, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 18-11. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction and any optional codes adopted by the county, as amended by the state department of community affairs. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction that are set forth in section 18-14(a)(3) shall be referred to as the "construction codes." 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Sec. 18-12. - Title. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Ordinance for Administration and Enforcement of Construction Codes" (hereinafter referred to as the "Administrative Procedures Ordinance"). 
(b)  Effective date. These regulations shall be in full force and effect on June 3, 2003. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Sec. 18-13. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. The construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the county through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation. 
(2)  To assure the safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. [Neither t]he county, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Sec. 18-14. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Building permit required. Except where expressly exempted, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, the bearing walls, the exterior walls or the roof or the size of the building, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit (and certificate of zoning compliance) before beginning the work. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has satisfied all rules, regulations, and requirements of the zoning regulations, other county ordinances, and provided the requisite information as required by this division. 
(2)  Bonding requirement. Before issuing a building permit, the building official will determine if any bonding (either performance or maintenance) is necessary to protect public property from damage. If no bond is being held by the county for protection of the public property, the building official may require a bond or cash deposit to be furnished to insure that any damage to streets, sidewalks or other affected public property will be repaired, and that the surface of such places will be restored to its original condition upon completion of the work. The bond or other financial security shall have an AM Best Rating of A-6 or higher and approved by the county attorney and have been deposited with an agent approved by the building official equal to the cost of estimated construction of the public improvements. The bond amount shall be calculated by the director. Such cash deposits, escrow account or other instrument shall be accompanied by an agreement in writing directed to the county containing in substance the same terms and conditions as provided, however, that sufficient funds are retained in said cash deposit of escrow account to complete construction of all required improvements. Upon completion and satisfactory inspection of all affected public property improvements, all funds remaining in said deposit of account shall be returned to the depositor. 
(3)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. The following construction codes are hereby adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference: 
a.  International Residential and Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
b.  National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as published by the National Fire Protection Association, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
c.  International Fuel and Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
e.  International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
f.  International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
g.  International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
h.  International Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
i.  International Housing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
j.  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
k.  International Life Safety Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, referenced in section 18-26 of the Code of Ordinances, and incorporated herein by reference. 
(4)  Interpretation. Where the construction codes, as set forth in subsection (a)(3), state that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the enforcing officer, this shall be construed to give the building official only the power to determine whether the rules and regulations established in subsection (a)(3) have been complied with, and shall not be construed as giving such officer discretionary powers. 
(5)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(6)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(7)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(8)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(b)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. If the occupancy or use of the structure is changed, the owner, occupier, or tenant shall be required to comply with the zoning regulations and other applicable county ordinances prior to such change in occupancy. 
(3)  Environmental health department approval required. Where an applicant proposes construction activity such as alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work to any existing structure or building that enlarges that structure or building, the applicant must first present to the building official a letter of authorization from the environmental health department and onsite sewage management system inspection report that indicate the construction activity will not encroach upon or have an adverse effect upon the onsite sewage management system, the replacement area for such system, or the water well system. 
(c)  Moved structures. In addition to subsection (a)(1), structures moved into or within the county shall be made to comply with the same construction codes as for new structures. This shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for safety, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy conservation, means of egress, structural strength and stability, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, fire prevention, and all other general safeguards against hazards related to use or occupancy. 
(d)  Powers and duties of the building official. 
(1)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(2)  Department of community development. The department of community development (hereinafter referred to as "department"), is hereby designated to administer and begin enforcement proceedings for the construction codes. The board of commissioners hereby designates the director of the department as the chief agent, and the persons assigned and fulfilling the positions thereunder, including but not limited to, the building official, code enforcement officers, manufactured home inspector(s), building inspectors, and animal control officers as agents for the purposes of enforcing the construction codes, completing, signing, issuing, and serving citations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and O.C.G.A. § 36-74-12. 
(3)  Building section of department. There is hereby established a building section of the community development department. Within the building section, the person designated to be in charge shall be known as the building official. 
a.  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the building section shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his/her duties or conflict with the interests of this division. 
b.  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(4)  No guarantee. The issuance of a building permit, or approval of particular work following an inspection, shall not amount to a guarantee or warranty that such building or structure is free from defects. 
(5)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the land use enforcement board, charged with the administration and enforcement of this division, the construction codes, and acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing authority under their applicable policies and ordinances until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(6)  Right of entry. In addition to all other county ordinances and state law providing for the right of entry, if the building official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this division. 
(7)  Stop work orders. 
a.  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work requiring a permit, regulated by the construction codes, including but not limited to zoning ordinances and resolutions, ordinances and resolutions enacting subdivision regulations, environmental ordinances and resolutions, ordinances and resolutions regulating the development of real property, and ordinances and regulations relating to the use of land being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
b.  Issuance. The notice of the stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, property owner or their agent, or to the person performing the work. In the event that no permit holder or property owner can be immediately located, the notice of stop work order shall be placed at or on the permit card or in another conspicuous location. The notice shall be red in color and contain the following wording: "STOP WORK ORDER. Work at this site shall not continue until items listed on the order are corrected and this card removed by the building official or his agent." It shall be unlawful for any person other than the building official to remove or destroy such notice after being placed on the permit card or other applicable location. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
c.  Unlawful continuance. No person shall continue or cause any work to continue after a stop work order has been issued, except such work that has been directed to be preformed to correct a violation or unsafe condition. 
(8)  Revocation of permits. 
a.  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(9)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code and chapter 18, article III of the County Code of Ordinances, relating to dilapidated and unsafe buildings. 
(10)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(11)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-15, § 1) 
Sec. 18-15. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application; when required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this division shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building: 
a.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet (11.15 m 2 ). 
b.  Fences not over six feet (1,829 mm) high. 
c.  Oil derricks. 
d.  Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
e.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. 
f.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of an accessible route. 
g.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
h.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
i.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy, which are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (19,000 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
j.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems. 
k.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
l.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of group R-3 and group U occupancies. 
m.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
(2)  Electrical: 
a.  Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the installations of towers and antennas. 
c.  Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas: 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical: 
a.  Portable heating appliance; 
b.  Portable ventilation equipment; 
c.  Portable cooling unit; 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code; 
e.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.  Portable evaporative cooler; 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(5)  Plumbing: 
a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(6)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
(7)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(8)  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(9)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(c)  Work authorized. A permit required by this division shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(1)  Information required. Each application for a permit shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The owner or his/her authorized agent shall sign the application. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(2)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(d)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by a design professional shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All group assembly (A), educational (E), and institutional (I) occupancies; 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high; or 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 sq. ft. (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(4)  Exception : Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(5)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(6)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(7)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(e)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicted and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. Any documents requiring review by the local fire department and/or state fire marshal's office will be forwarded to their respective offices by the building official for examination. A permit shall not be issued for work requiring local and/or state fire approval until such has been made in writing to the building official. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(f)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Public right-of-way. No construction of any structure (temporary or permanent), building, or alteration thereof shall be undertaken where said building change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages to project onto any street, alley or public right-of-way, unless the applicant has made application and been granted approval by proper authority to alter the lines of the public street on which the building, erection or alteration shall project; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the public right-of-way is not encroached upon. 
(g)  Contractors responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every person who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or county ordinances, rules and regulations concerning licensing. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the department with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(h)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, or other applicable law or ordinances, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of a certificate of a design professional. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon a certificate of a design professional or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the design professional who signed the certificate or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a certificate that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall enforce, in writing or by stamp on all sets of plans or drawings that such plans or drawings have been reviewed and indicate that such plans or drawings have been approved or denied. The building official shall retain one set and the remaining sets shall be returned to the applicant. A copy of the approved plans or drawings shall be kept on the site of construction or work at all times and shall be made available for review when requested by the building official or designee. 
(i)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the board of commissioners have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, including installation or relocation of a manufactured home or conventional home before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees ICC International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings and IBC International Building Code. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations for construction projects that are classified as new construction, the number of square feet of construction or the number of square feet of construction to be served by the system to be installed, in conjunction with and limited by the building valuation data, as established from time to time by the International Code Council or by similar data, and in conjunction with and limited by the hourly rate, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. For construction projects that are classified as renovation and all other construction projects other than those classified as new construction, the cost of the project in conjunction with and limited by the building valuation data that conforms with the principles and methods established from time to time by the International Code Council or by similar data, and in conjunction with and limited by the hourly rate, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(6)  Reinspection fees. Reinspection fees shall be required when work performed is required to be reinspected due to the following reasons: 
a.  The required permits are not posted on the job site. 
b.  The required construction drive and/or erosion control measures are not installed. 
c.  The work is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed. 
d.  Work to be inspected has been covered and proper inspection cannot be performed. 
e.  A reinspection has been requested without correction of previously noted violations or deficiencies. 
Reinspection fees shall be set by the board of commissioners as part of the schedule of fees, except that fee may be doubled for repeated failure to correct violations. Fees charged shall be paid at the office of the building official before further inspections are performed. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-15, § 1) 
Sec. 18-16. - Inspections and occupancy. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record may be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (a)(6). He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability in accordance with state law. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit and address. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous location on the premises, visible from the street or road. The permit may be located away from the street or road provided that the address assigned to the premises is permanently posted at the street or road. The permit shall be protected from the weather and placed in such position as to allow the required entries to be made conveniently by the building department representative. The permit holder shall maintain the permit card in such position until such time as work has been completed and the building official has granted final inspection approval. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent shall make the following minimum required inspections, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the construction codes. 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after (a) trenches are excavated and forms erected or (b) trenches are excavated or forms erected. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, all wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents that are to be concealed, are complete. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste, vent and supply piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Note: Reference the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests of soil, waste, vent and supply piping. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspection specified as minimum, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction, system, component, assembly, fabrication, application, modification, site or premises to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the construction codes or other laws and regulations that are enforced by the building section of the community development department. 
(8)  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of any permit or their duly authorized agent to ensure to the best of their ability that the work conforms to all applicable codes and to notify the building official when the work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide reasonable access to any structure and/or premises where inspections are required, and to maintain such access until final approval has been made. 
(9)  Written release. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with any of the construction codes. Any portions shall not be covered or concealed until approved by the building official. 
(10)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, service systems, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(11)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his/her agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(b)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A building, or part thereof, shall not be occupied or used unless the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and approved and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes and all other applicable laws and ordinances, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspections have been approved by the required local and/or state agencies, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. If the occupancy or use of the structure is changed, the owner, occupier, or tenant shall be required to comply with the zoning regulations and other applicable county ordinances. 
(2)  Certificate of completion—Required for utility connection. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, and all other applicable laws and ordinances, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete for certain types of permits and released for use so that connection may be made to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Certificate of completion for telecommunications structure. Upon the completion of all construction activities and prior to the authorized operation of the telecommunications structure, a compliance inspection(s) of the premise, grounds, and structure shall demonstrate that permittee has satisfied all requirements of the telecommunications ordinance. As-built drawing shall be submitted if requested. If compliance is demonstrated, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion to the authorized representative and the telecommunications structure may be operated as designed. For purpose of this section, a final inspection may be considered as a certificate of completion. 
(4)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or service system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(c)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official, or another appropriate agency, may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he/she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S (storage) and group F (factory) occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(d)  Tests. The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Sec. 18-17. - Appeals from decision of building official. 
(a)  Appeals. The land use enforcement board shall have the power to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official. 
(1)  Appeal of a decision of the building official may be authorized by the land use enforcement board in specific cases when any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Presentation of appeal to director. The person seeking to appeal the decision of the building official may request an appeal hearing before the land use enforcement board. Said appeal shall be in writing, stating the relief being sought, and the reasons why the request should be granted. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the director of community development. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the director of community development. The director of community development shall place the appeal before the land use enforcement board who shall have the authority, after hearing from both the applicant as well as the building official, to grant, modify, or deny the appeal. 
(3)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may take whatever measures are reasonably necessary to act in the best interest of the county and its population, regardless of whether an appeal has been filed. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Sec. 18-18. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 2) 
Secs. 18-19—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The county has entered into agreements with Whitesburg, Bowden, Temple, and Villa Rica to provide clerical support and building code inspections for those cities. Copies of those agreements are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 18-26. - Building and construction codes. 
The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act and is codified at O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B). 
(1)  Standard Building Code (IBC). 
(2)  National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(4)  International Mechanical Code. 
(5)  International Plumbing Code. 
(6)  International Code Council. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Fire Code. 
a.  Effective January 1, 2006, the minimum fire flow for all buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings will be specified in Table B105.1 of the International Fire Code. A reduction in the required fire flow rate to a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute may be allowed where the building or structure is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with chapter 9 of the International Fire Code. This subsection (8)(a) shall be in full force and effect until December 31, 2010, at which time it shall expire and be repealed in its entirety. 
(9)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(10)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(11)  International Life Safety Code. 
(Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1; Res./Ord. of 12-20-05, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-15, § 1) 
Secs. 18-27—18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DILAPIDATED AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
Code and ordinance enforcement officer means the code and ordinance enforcement officer for the county or his designee. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing body means the board of commissioners. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § II; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 18-47—18-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-56. - Code and ordinance enforcement officer. 
The code and ordinance enforcement officer for the county is hereby designated to exercise all powers prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(A); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-57. - Notice and hearing. 
Whenever a request is filed with the code and ordinance enforcement officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of the county if the property in question is located in the unincorporated area of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the code and ordinance enforcement officer, on his own motion, that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the magistrate court at the county courthouse fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint. The owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(B); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-58. - Determination; order. 
(a)  Orders. After such notice and hearing, if the magistrate court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring one of the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use it shall be done. Otherwise, the dwelling, building or structure shall be vacated and closed as a human habitation. 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, the order shall require the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(b)  Removal or demolition not required; exception. In no event shall the magistrate court require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value of such dwelling, building, or structure when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this law. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(C); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-59. - Failure to comply with order generally; abatement; posting of placard. 
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the magistrate court may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the code and ordinance enforcement officer may post on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(D); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-60. - Failure to comply with order to remove or demolish; abatement. 
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the magistrate court may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(E); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-61. - Lien. 
The amount of the cost of vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. This lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of these costs by the code and ordinance enforcement officer in the office of the county clerk on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is ordered removed or demolished by the magistrate court, it shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the code and ordinance enforcement officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the magistrate court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(F); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-62. - Collection of amount due on lien. 
The county shall enforce the collection of any amount due on the lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on the lien by paying the county, within 30 days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on the lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made. 
(2)  Should the property upon which the lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on the lien shall be due and payable to the county. 
(3)  Should the amount due on the lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § III(G); Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-63. - Additional powers of code and ordinance enforcement officer. 
The code and ordinance enforcement officer may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use. 
(2)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § V; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-64. - Additional powers of board of commissioners. 
The magistrate court may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(2)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(3)  Delegate any of its functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as it may designate. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § VI; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Sec. 18-65. - Service of complaints or orders. 
(a)  Parties to be served. Complaints or orders issued by the board of commissioners pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each party in interest. The return of service signed by the code and ordinance enforcement officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)  Owners and parties residing outside county. If any of the owners and parties in interest reside out of the county, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party, or such service may be made by any citizen. The return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such party was served either personally, or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of state. Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county or, in the absence of such newspaper in the county or municipality, in one printed and published outside the county or municipality and circulated in the county or municipality in which the dwellings, buildings, or structures are located. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresident is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  Minors; insane persons; disabled persons. If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section or this subsection in such cases. If such minor, insane person, or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative, or if such minor or insane person lives outside the county or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of this county or who are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  Owner whereabouts unknown. If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the code and ordinance enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  Copy filed for filing of lis pendens notice. A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § VII; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Cross reference— Adoption of county ADA transition plan, § 2-5.1. 
Sec. 18-66. - Injunctions and appeals. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the board of commissioners may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the code and ordinance enforcement officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the code and ordinance enforcement officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the board of commissioners. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § VIII; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Secs. 18-67—18-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION 

Sec. 18-76. - Dangerous or injurious conditions. 
The code and ordinance enforcement officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(Ord. of 7-8-90, § IV; Res./Ord. of 6-3-03, § 1) 
Secs. 18-77—18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 18-91. - Adopted. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners hereby adopts the 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code as amended herein and attached hereto as exhibit A, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the county; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; repealing and all other ordinances or parts of laws in conflict herewith. 
(b)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition as amended herein (attached hereto as exhibit A) be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the county for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are [is] on file in the office of community development. 
(Ord. of 1-2-16(1), §§ 1, 2,) 
EXHIBIT A OF ARTICLE IV 
PART 1 — SCOPE AND APPLICATION 
CHAPTER 1 — SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101 — GENERAL 
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of Carroll County, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
[A] 101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
[A] 101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
[A] 101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
SECTION 102 — APPLICABILITY 
[A] 102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
[A] 102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
[A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code. 
[A] 102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary. 
[A] 102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
[A] 102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
[A] 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in 102.3 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply. 
[A] 102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
[A] 102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
[A] 102.8 Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official. 
[A] 102.9 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. 
[A] 102.10 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
PART 2 — ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
SECTION 103 — DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION 
[A] 103.1 General. The Director of the Department of Community Development and those assigned therein shall be known as the code official(s). 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. 
[A] 103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy(s). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code official. 
[A] 103.4 Liability. The code official, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
[A] 103.5 Fees. Reserved. 
SECTION 104 — DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL 
[A] 104.1 General. The code official is hereby authorized and tasked with enforcement of the provisions of this code in his/her discretion. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
[A] 104.2 Inspections. The code official has the authority to make all of the required inspections, or accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
[A] 104.3 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
[A] 104.4 Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
[A] 104.5 Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
[A] 104.6 Department records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. 
SECTION 105 — APPROVAL 
[A] 105.1 Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files. 
[A] 105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
[A] 105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
[A] 105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency. 
[A] 105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
[A] 105.4 Used material and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code official. 
[A] 105.5 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
[A] 105.6 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
SECTION 106 — VIOLATIONS 
[A] 106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
[A] 106.2 Notice of violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 107. 
[A] 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the Carroll Count Magistrate Court. Violations may be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official may issue a citation or institute a civil proceeding at his/her discretion. In addition to any fines or potential jail time, the court may also removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
[A] 106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. The maximum fine per violation is $1000.00 and maximum incarceration shall be 60 days per violation. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served may be deemed a separate offense. 
[A] 106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
SECTION 107 — NOTICES AND ORDERS 
[A] 107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3. 
[A] 107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  Be in writing. 
2.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
3.  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
4.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
5.  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with Section 106.3. 
[A] 107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
1.  Delivered personally; 
2.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
3.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
[A] 107.4 Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the code official. 
[A] 107.5 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 106.4. 
[A] 107.6 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
SECTION 108 — UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 
[A] 108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
[A] 108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
[A] 108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
[A] 108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
[A] 108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
[A] 108.1.5 Dangerousstructureorpremises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous: 
1.  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings. 
2.  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress. 
3.  Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged. 
4.  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value. 
5.  The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
6.  The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy. 
7.  The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
8.  Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
9.  A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
10.  Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the code official to be a threat to life or health. 
11.  Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
[A] 108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
[A] 108.2.1 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 102.7 in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The code official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
[A] 108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 107.2. 
[A] 108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
[A] 108.4.1 Placard removal. The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. 
[A] 108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. 
[A] 108.6 Abatement methods. The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the code official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. 
[A] 108.7 Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. 
SECTION 109 — EMERGENCY MEASURES 
[A] 109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
[A] 109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
[A] 109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official may temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
[A] 109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official in his/her discretion should employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
[A] 109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
[A] 109.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. 
SECTION 110 — DEMOLITION 
[A] 110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official. 
[A] 110.2 Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with Section 107. 
[A ] 110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order approved by the court after there has been notice and an opportunity to be heard following the time prescribed, the code official may cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
[A] 110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
SECTION 111 — MEANS OF APPEAL 
[A] 111.1 Application for appeal. Appeal from any order of the Magistrate Court is appealable as provided by law 
SECTION 112 — STOP WORK ORDER 
[A] 112.1 Authority. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
[A] 112.2 Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume. 
[A] 112.3 Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
[A] 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $500.00 dollars or more than $1000.00 dollars. 
CHAPTER 2 — DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 201 — GENERAL 
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code, International Zoning Code or NFPA 70, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. 
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
201.5 Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
SECTION 202 — GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection. 
[A] APPROVED. Approved by the code official. 
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
[A] CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. 
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection. 
DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness. 
[B] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
[Z] EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots. 
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure. 
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
[B] GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
[B] HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
[A] LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose. 
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure. 
[A] OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
[A] OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods. 
[A] PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
[A] PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
[B] SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
[A] STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength. 
[M] VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
[Z] YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
CHAPTER 3 — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 301 — GENERAL 
301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
301.3 Vacant structures and land within Platted Subdivisions. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
SECTION 302 — EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS 
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth. Weeds means vegetative growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths. This term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. 
302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no more than 2 inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes, "non-commercial uses". 
302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
SECTION 303 — SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS 
303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 304 — EXTERIOR STRUCTURE 
304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
304.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
1.  The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength; 
2.  The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects; 
3.  Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state; 
4.  Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or water tight; 
5.  Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects; 
6.  Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
7.  Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
8.  Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
9.  Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
10.  Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
11.  Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
12.  Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or 
13.  Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official. 
304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
[F] 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible on the mailbox or from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). 
304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
304.6 Exterior walls. Reserved. 
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
304.14 Insect screens. For structures which provide food to the public or for sale, during the period from March to November, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3. 
304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved, protection against the entry of rodents. 
304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock throw of 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
304.19 Gates. All exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly secure the gates. 
SECTION 305 — INTERIOR STRUCTURE 
305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
Exceptions: Single- Family Residential Structures unless the same are rented or leased 
305.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
1.  The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength; 
2.  The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects; 
3.  Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state; 
4.  Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects; 
5.  Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
6.  Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official. 
305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
SECTION 306 — COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY 
306.1 General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. 
306.1.1 Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
1.  Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.1.  Collapse of footing or foundation system; 
1.2.  Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil expansion; 
1.3.  Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil; 
1.4.  Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation; 
1.5.  Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or 
1.6.  Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to the ground water table. 
2.  Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
2.1.  Deterioration; 
2.2.  Ultimate deformation; 
2.3.  Fractures; 
2.4.  Fissures; 
2.5.  Spalling; 
2.6.  Exposed reinforcement; or 
2.7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
3.  Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
3.1.  Deterioration; 
3.2.  Corrosion; 
3.3.  Elastic deformation; 
3.4.  Ultimate deformation; 
3.5.  Stress or strain cracks; 
3.6.  Joint fatigue; or 
3.7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
4.  Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
4.1.  Deterioration; 
4.2.  Ultimate deformation; 
4.3.  Fractures in masonry or mortar joints; 
4.4.  Fissures in masonry or mortar joints; 
4.5.  Spalling; 
4.6.  Exposed reinforcement; or 
4.7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
5.  Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
5.1.  Deterioration; 
5.2.  Elastic deformation; 
5.3.  Ultimate deformation; 
5.4.  Metal fatigue; or 
5.5.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
6.  Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
6.1.  Ultimate deformation; 
6.2.  Deterioration; 
6.3.  Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin; 
6.4.  Fire damage beyond charring; 
6.5.  Significant splits and checks; 
6.6.  Horizontal shear cracks; 
6.7.  Vertical shear cracks; 
6.8.  Inadequate support; 
6.9.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or 
6.10.  Excessive cutting and notching. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official. 
SECTION 307 — HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS 
307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
SECTION 308 — RUBBISH AND GARBAGE 
308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
308.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
308.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
308.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
308.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
SECTION 309 — PEST ELIMINATION 
309.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. 
309.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
309.3 Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the premises. 
309.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for pest elimination. 
309.5 Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for pest elimination. 
CHAPTER 4 — LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 
SECTION 401 — GENERAL 
401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code shall be permitted. 
SECTION 402 — LIGHT 
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one-and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m 2 ) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads. 
402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
SECTION 403 — VENTILATION 
403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1. 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 m 2 ). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403.1, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where specifically approved in writing by the code official. 
2.  Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances. 
403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers. 
SECTION 404 — OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 
404.1 Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units, or other type of multi-family dwelling unit shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be a minimum of 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
404.3 Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm). 
Exceptions: 
1.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced a minimum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting a maximum of 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height. 
2.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with a minimum clear height of 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
3.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm) over a minimum of one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) shall be included. 
404.4 Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5. 
404.4.1 Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m 2 ) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m 2 ) of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
404.4.2 Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms. 
404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a 2 dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7. 
404.5 Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5. 

 
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m 2 
a. See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
b. See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
404.5.1 Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4. 
404.5.2 Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
404.6 Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements: 
1.  A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a minimum clear floor area of 120 square feet (11.2 m 2 ). A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 220 square feet (20.4 m 2 ). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of 320 square feet (29.7 m 2 ). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3. 
2.  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided. 
3.  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
4.  The maximum number of occupants shall be three. 
404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
CHAPTER 5 — PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 501 — GENERAL 
501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
SECTION 502 — REQUIRED FACILITIES 
[P] 502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
[P] 502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units. 
[P] 502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants. 
[P] 502.4 Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
[P] 502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
[P] 502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises. 
SECTION 503 — TOILET ROOMS 
[P] 503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
[P] 503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing a maximum of one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
[P] 503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located a maximum of one story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities. 
[P] 503.4 Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
SECTION 504 — PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES 
[P] 504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
[P] 504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
[P] 504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
SECTION 505 — WATER SYSTEM 
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
[P] 505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum temperature of 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
SECTION 506 — SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
[P] 506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
[P] 506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
[P] 506.3 Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be maintained in accordance with this code and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be regularly serviced and cleaned to prevent the discharge of oil, grease, and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system or the sewage treatment plant or processes. All records of maintenance, cleaning and repairs shall be available for inspection by the code official. 
SECTION 507 — STORM DRAINAGE 
[P] 507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
CHAPTER 6 — MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 601 — GENERAL 
601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
601.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
SECTION 602 — HEATING FACILITIES 
602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided as set forth in the Georgia State Minimum Code for HVAC 
SECTION 603 — MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT 
603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
603.2 Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
603.6 Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 
SECTION 604 — ELECTRICAL FACILITIES 
604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605. 
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire. 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a minimum rating of 60 amperes. 
604.3 Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
604.3.1 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water. 
604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code (NEC). 
Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement: 
1.  Enclosed switches, rated a maximum of 600 volts or less; 
2.  Busway, rated a maximum of 600 volts; 
3.  Panelboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts; 
4.  Switchboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts; 
5.  Fire pump controllers, rated a maximum of 600 volts; 
6.  Manual and magnetic motor controllers; 
7.  Motor control centers; 
8.  Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers; 
9.  Low-voltage power circuit breakers; 
10.  Protective relays, meters and current transformers; 
11.  Low- and medium-voltage switchgear; 
12.  Liquid-filled transformers; 
13.  Cast-resin transformers; 
14.  Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water; 
15.  Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water; 
16.  Luminaires that are listed as submersible; 
17.  Motors; 
18.  Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment. 
604.3.2 Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire. 
604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the NEC.. 
Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement. 
SECTION 605 — ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 
605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover for the location. 
605.3 Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. Pool and spa luminaries over 15 V shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
605.4 Wiring. Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running through doors, windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or ceilings. 
SECTION 606 — ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS 
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall comply with the rules and regulations of the GA Office of Safety Fire Commissioner. 
SECTION 607 — DUCT SYSTEMS 
607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
CHAPTER 7 — FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 701 — GENERAL 
701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
SECTION 702 — MEANS OF EGRESS 
[F] 702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code. 
[F] 702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed. 
[F] 702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code. 
[F] 702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
[F] 702.5 Overcrowding and life safety hazards. The number of persons occupying a structure or portion thereof, excluding dwelling units that comply with Section 404.5, shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. Calculations for overcrowding conditions shall be based upon the requirements of Sections 404.5 through 404.5.2. A structure shall be considered overcrowded and a life safety hazard under any of the following conditions: 
1.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the number of occupants exceeds one person per 5 square feet of open net floor area of such room or space when fixed seating is not provided; or, 
2.  A structure, building, room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the total number of occupants exceeds the exit capacity of the structure, building, room or area involved; or, 
3.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be overcrowded and a life safety hazard if the minimum number of required exits is not provided for the calculated or expected occupant load; or, 
4.  A structure, building, individual room or designated portion thereof shall be deemed to be a life safety hazard if the minimum construction requirements for area and height or the occupant location tables as specified in the Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations are exceeded based upon the number of required exits is not provided for the calculated or expected occupant load. 
SECTION 703 — FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS 
[F] 703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
[F] 703.2 Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
SECTION 704 — FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
[F] 704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
[F] 704.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25. 
[F] 704.2 Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
1.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
2.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
3.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
[F] 704.2.1 Smoke alarms in Group R occupancies. Smoke alarms in buildings containing Group R occupancies built prior to January 1, 2007, shall comply with the minimum statutory requirements of Code Section 25-2-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) Title 25, Chapter 2. (Effective January 1). 
[F] 704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
[F] 704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind. 
2.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
CHAPTER 8 — REFERENCED STANDARDS 
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.7. 

 

 

 

 
APPENDIX A — BOARDING STANDARD 
The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. 
A101 — GENERAL 
A101.1 General. All windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure. 
A102 — MATERIALS 
A102.1 Boarding sheet material. Boarding sheet material shall be minimum ½-inch (12.7 mm) thick wood structural panels complying with the International Building Code. 
A102.2 Boarding framing material. Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) solid sawn lumber complying with the International Building Code. 
A102.3 Boarding fasteners. Boarding fasteners shall be minimum 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) diameter carriage bolts of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply with the International Building Code. 
A103 — INSTALLATION 
A103.1 Boarding installation. The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1) and A103.1(2) and Sections A103.2 through A103.5. 
A103.2 Boarding sheet material. The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window. 
A103.3 Windows. The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the window sash shall be removed and stored. The 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) strong back framing material shall be cut minimum 2 inches (51 mm) wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the inside of the window opening 6 inches minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window opening. The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured. 
A103.4 Door walls. The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) framing material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Blocking shall also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) on center vertically. Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating every 6 inches (152 mm) on center. 
A103.5 Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One door to the structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner. 
A104 — REFERENCED STANDARDS 

 
FIGURE A103.1(1) BOARDING OF DOOR OR WINDOW 

FIGURE A103.1(2) BOARDING OF DOOR WALL 

INDEX 

 
(Ord. of 1-2-16(1), §§ 1, 2,) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; kennels and pet shops, § 14-59; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; signs, ch. 78; solid waste, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.; Fair Business Practices Act, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390; the Common Day of Rest Act of 1974, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-570 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— County's authority to levy, assess and collect business and occupational license taxes and license fees; exemptions, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-22, 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business activity, within a multiple line business, from which the business derives its largest amount of gross receipts. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  "Gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax. 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts. 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563(a)(2). 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent. 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a charitable nonprofit organization, qualifying as such under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of America. 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession or business enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. The term "occupation tax" as used in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes and is not to be considered as a regulatory fee. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which qualify as such under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of America. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. This term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-7. - Purpose and scope. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.10) 
Sec. 22-8. - Required. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county whether with a location in the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation. Such tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code and ordinance enforcement officer or his deputies or to any police officer of the county upon his or their request. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.1) 
Sec. 22-9. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $35.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed for those persons in occupations and professions listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(c)  An additional, nonrefundable administrative fee of $45.00 shall be required on all businesses for which a criminal background investigation is required pursuant to state law and/or local ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.3; Ord. of 6-2-15, § 1) 
Sec. 22-10. - Tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those business and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county, and also upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria set forth in this section. 
(b)  For the industrial and commercial class, the tax shall be levied on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States, or the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), as amended or revised. 
(c)  For the commercial class and industrial class, the tax classification for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the collecting agency. 

 
(d)  The county shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have in the unincorporated area of the county, nor shall the county require that a business pay occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the gross receipts. 
(e)  The county shall not require occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states, provided that those receipts were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. 
(f)  The county shall require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the county and sell property inside the county, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17. 
(g)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in the county in any other manner except as described in this article. 
(h)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the county or in the state. 
(i)  The occupation tax charged to a business for any given year shall not exceed two times the tax charged to the same business for the previous tax year. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.4; Ord. of 6-2-15, § 1) 
Sec. 22-11. - Paying tax of business with no location in the state. 
This article requires registration and assessment of a tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the unincorporated area of the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.5) 
Sec. 22-12. - Each line of business is to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the county shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.6) 
Sec. 22-13. - Number of businesses considered operating; multiple locations or lines of business. 
(a)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(b)  Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the county. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.7) 
Sec. 22-14. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in subsection 22-10(c). 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, with an office located in the county; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by March 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.8) 
Sec. 22-15. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.9) 
Sec. 22-16. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable at the codes enforcement office on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 of each year. All persons conducting business, etc., in the unincorporated area of the county shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed by this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the county in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the code and ordinance enforcement office. If any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13, in the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the code and ordinance enforcement office may proceed to collect the delinquent taxes and any fines imposed in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), §§ 7.1.11, 7.1.23) 
Sec. 22-17. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses who have multiple locations inside and outside of the county where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each county location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the county and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the county the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the county and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the county shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts of the local operation. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.12) 
Sec. 22-18. - Exemption for business operated for charitable purpose. 
Organizations qualifying as a charitable organization exempt from federal income tax shall be exempt from occupation tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.13) 
Sec. 22-19. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq., shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.14) 
Sec. 22-20. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, criminal background check or any other regulatory matter mandated by state or federal law or local ordinance shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.15) 
Sec. 22-21. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained the registration, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.16) 
Sec. 22-22. - When registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before March 1 of each year. Such penalty will automatically be assessed on March 2 of each year hereafter. 
(b)  Every person commencing a new business in the county after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the county any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained the registration shall be subject to the penalties set out in this article. The tax charged to the new business will be prorated in accordance with the number of months remaining in the tax year in which the business commences. 
(c)  The penalty for failure to comply with this section shall be assessed in the amount of ten percent of the occupational tax due. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article, may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(d)  The registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the code and ordinance enforcement officer, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.17) 
Sec. 22-23. - Subpoena and arresting powers of code and ordinance enforcement office. 
The code and ordinance enforcement office and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.19) 
Sec. 22-24. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law. 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production, from or on the land, of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Nonprofit organizations and state and local authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.20) 
Sec. 22-25. - Tax inapplicable in certain situations. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.21) 
Sec. 22-26. - Taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of returns; overpayment or underpayment. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both the county and the taxpayer, and the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax levied in section 22-10 and those professions electing to make returns based on gross receipts under the provisions of section 22-14 shall, on or before the times set forth in this section, file with the code and ordinance enforcement office the returns specifically provided for in this section, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to the occupation tax for the current calendar year shall on or before March 1 of the current calendar year file with the code and ordinance enforcement office of the county, on a form furnished by the revenue collection officer, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. Such return shall be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. 
(b)  If the actual gross receipts for the prior year is different from the estimate, the county will adjust the tax assessed and paid during the prior year. If the actual gross receipts for the prior year are higher than previously estimated, an additional tax will be assessed and will be paid by the business before issuance of the current year's registration. If the actual gross receipts for the previous year is less than the previous estimate, the proper tax will be calculated and the county shall issue an immediate refund of the amount overpaid. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in the return. The return shall also show a figure calculating the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. The figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.22) 
Sec. 22-27. - Payment of tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the unincorporated limits of the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid in accordance with section 22-26 and subsection 22-16(a). 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.24) 
Sec. 22-28. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied in this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the county or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerk of the county using such returns for the purpose of this article and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as "employees." Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States and other local governments. Information provided by a business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupational tax purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.25) 
Sec. 22-29. - Inspections of books and records. 
The code and ordinance enforcement office of the county, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, or revenue collection officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county. Upon demand of the code and ordinance enforcement office such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the code and ordinance enforcement officer or his designee at their discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional one percent of the deficiency for each month or fraction thereof that the deficiency was due and unpaid shall be assessed. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.26) 
Sec. 22-30. - Registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Except for persons whose qualifications to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state, the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax certificate granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business in the county for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax certificate shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at the time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the code and ordinance enforcement officer in accordance with provisions found in section 22-29. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.27) 
Sec. 22-31. - Effect of failure to comply with article; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the county after the registration for such business has been revoked as above; any persons, their managers, agents or employees required by this article to make returns, showing the amount of gross receipts and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this section, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officer, agents, employees or representatives of the county request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.27) 
Sec. 22-32. - Lien for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied, the code and ordinance enforcement office of the county, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the county) of the person liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances and laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on, and date from, the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the code and ordinance enforcement officer of the county upon the property of defendant located in the county, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and the laws of the state and county, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the laws of the state and county in regard to tax executions. when a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the code and ordinance enforcement office against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall be not allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.28) 
Sec. 22-33. - Amendment, repeal of article. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the county to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.29) 
Sec. 22-34. - Application of article to prior ordinances. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any previous county ordinance passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article shall continue and shall remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.30) 
Sec. 22-35. - Enforcement. 
It is made the duty of the code and ordinance enforcement office to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the magistrate court of the county or any other court having competent jurisdiction over the matter charged. It is made the further duty of the code and ordinance enforcement officer, his designee and assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the county as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.31) 
Sec. 22-36. - Article to remain in full force and effect until changed by commission. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.32) 
Sec. 22-37. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.33) 
Sec. 22-38. - Penalty for article violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13, except that any person whose qualifications to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state and who fails to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article shall be subject to a revocation of license, except as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 12-12-95(1), § 7.1.18) 
Secs. 22-39—22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DIRECT SELLERS AND PEDDLERS 

Sec. 22-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or one purporting to be such. 
Direct seller means any individual who, for himself, or for a partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent business place or residence of the individual, partnership, association or corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer. 
Goods means personal property of any kind, and shall include goods provided incidentally to services offered or sold. 
Permanent merchant means a direct seller who, for at least one year prior to the consideration of the application of this article to the merchant, has continuously operated an established place of business in this county or has continuously resided in this county and now does business from his residence. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-47. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.13) 
Sec. 22-48. - Registration—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales within the county without being registered for that purpose as provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.1) 
Sec. 22-49. - Same—Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this article: 
(1)  Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery goods to regular customers on established routes; 
(2)  Any person selling agricultural products which such person has grown; 
(3)  Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale by such merchant within the county and who delivers such goods in their regular course of business; 
(4)  Any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, in which the buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by, such person; 
(5)  Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which has had a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit arrangement, with the prospective customer; 
(6)  Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected with the sale or offering for sale of goods; and 
(7)  Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.3) 
Sec. 22-50. - Same—Form; contents. 
Applicants for registration must complete and return to the code and ordinance enforcement office a registration form furnished by the code and ordinance enforcement office which shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, permanent address, telephone number, and temporary address, if any; 
(2)  Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed by, or whose merchandise is being sold; 
(4)  Temporary address and telephone number from which business will be conducted, if any; 
(5)  Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of the goods offered, and any services offered; 
(6)  Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable; 
(7)  Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by applicant in the conduct of his business; 
(8)  The last three previous cities or counties where the applicant conducted a similar business; 
(9)  Place where the applicant can be contacted for at least seven days after leaving the county; and 
(10)  A statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant business within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place of conviction. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.4) 
Sec. 22-51. - Same—Additional information. 
Each applicant shall present to the code and ordinance enforcement office for examination: 
(1)  A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required; 
(2)  A state certificate of examination and approval from the sealer of weights and measures where an applicant's business requires the use of weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities; and 
(3)  A state health officer's certificate where an applicant's business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be certified under state law; such certificate to state that the applicant is apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more than 90 days prior to the date the application for the license is made. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.5) 
Sec. 22-52. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  At the time the registration is returned, a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per each direct seller shall be paid to the code and ordinance enforcement office to cover the cost of processing the registration. 
(b)  Upon payment of such fee, the code and ordinance enforcement office shall register the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry. The code and ordinance enforcement office shall then issue the direct seller a permit authorizing the direct seller to conduct business in the county. 
(c)  Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of entry, subject to subsequent refusal, as provided in section 22-53. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.6) 
Sec. 22-53. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  Upon receipt of each application, the code and ordinance enforcement officer may refer it immediately to the county sheriff's department who may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in such registration. 
(b)  The code and ordinance enforcement office shall refuse to register the applicant if it is determined, pursuant to the investigation in subsection (a) of this section, that the application contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints of a material nature have been received and proven against the applicant by authorities in the three previous cities or counties in which the applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable provision of section 22-50. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.7) 
Sec. 22-54. - Appeal of registration denial. 
Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through direct appeal to the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.8) 
Sec. 22-55. - Regulation of conduct of direct sellers. 
The following regulations shall govern the conduct of direct sellers under this article: 
(1)  At all times while conducting business in the county, direct sellers shall have displayed upon their person a picture identification containing their name and the name of the person, firm, association, or corporation the direct seller represents or is employed by or whose merchandise is being sold. The direct seller shall have the responsibility of furnishing the same. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to conduct business in the county without first providing the following information on a daily basis to the code and ordinance enforcement office or 911: 
a.  The location where the direct seller will be transacting business; and 
b.  All direct sellers who will be conducting business at the location. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to call at any dwelling or other place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment; to call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is displayed bearing the words "no peddlers," "no solicitors" or words of similar meaning; to call at the rear door of any dwelling place; or to remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to misrepresent or make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality, quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his visit, his identity or the identity of the organization he represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting. Such portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the goods. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to impede the free use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to make any loud noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the source. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he is conducting business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.9) 
Sec. 22-56. - Disclosure requirements. 
The following disclosure requirements shall govern the conduct of direct sellers: 
(1)  After the initial greeting and before any other statement is made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his name, the name of the company or organization he is affiliated with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he offers to sell. 
(2)  If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall have the right to cancel the transaction when such right is provided by state law. 
(3)  If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later delivery of goods, he shall, at the time the order is taken, provide the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement; the amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made; the name, address and telephone number of the seller; the delivery or performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so, the terms thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.10) 
Sec. 22-57. - Records. 
The county sheriff's department shall report to the code and ordinance enforcement office all convictions for violation of this article and the code and ordinance enforcement office shall note any such violation on the record of the direct seller convicted. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.11) 
Sec. 22-58. - Revocation of registration. 
The permit of a direct seller may be revoked by the code and ordinance enforcement office for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-95, § 7.2.12) 
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county's current cable television franchise agreements are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISING 

Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Cable services. Defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "cable act"), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the cable act or the definition in the cable act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the cable act immediately prior to such time when the term was no longer being defined in the cable act or such time when such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system. Any "cable system" as defined in the cable act. 
County. Carroll County, Georgia. 
Commission. The Carroll County Board of Commissioners and its designee(s) or any successor thereto. 
Franchise. An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the county, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
Grantee. The legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
May. A permissive instruction as set forth in this article. 
Open video system. Defined by section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Ordinance. This article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person. Any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the county. 
Shall. A mandatory, not merely directive instruction as set forth in this article. 
Streets. The surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the county. 
Telecommunications services. Defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but does not include Cable Services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable. "Telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such time when the term was no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such time when such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(Ord. of 3-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 26-22. - Granting authority and franchising procedure. 
(a)  Granting authority. 
(1)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The county may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the county reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(3)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the county and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the county and the grantee. 
(4)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The county specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
(5)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the county. 
(6)  The grant of franchises by the county shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the cable act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(b)  Franchise applications. 
(1)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the county may determine, subject to applicable law (see appendix A, B, which are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk). 
(2)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the county shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
a.  Applicant's name, address, telephone number and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
b.  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the county: 
1.  Names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
2.  Names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
3.  Names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
4.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the county commission, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the county, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the county; 
5.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
6.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
c.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
2.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
3.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges and any other service charges; 
4.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
5.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
6.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
d.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
e.  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Commission, or by any other provision of law. 
(3)  Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
a.  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the county in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
b.  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the county in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $750.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the Carroll County Board of Commissioners. In the event that the county's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the county to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
c.  Review for completeness. Each application shall be reviewed for completeness, and if incomplete, the application will be rejected. Any rejected applications will include a memorandum to direct the applicant to causes of the incomplete application. If an application is accepted for further consideration, this provision shall not limit the commission from requesting other information. 
(c)  Responsibilities of applicants. It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the county and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)  Public availability of applications. To the extent determined by the commission, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated county office during normal business hours. 
(e)  Evaluation criteria. In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the county may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the county, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the county; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the county in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the county and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the county for safeguarding the interests of the County and the public. 
(f)  Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(1)  The county may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the commission deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the commission may seek advice from other county officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the commission, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(2)  If the commission, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the commission shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the commission and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(3)  The commission may authorize negotiations between county officials and applicants to determine whether the county and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(4)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the commission, the commission may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the county may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The county also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the county may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(g)  Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(1)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
a.  The term of the franchise; 
b.  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; 
c.  The compensation to be paid to the county, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
d.  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
e.  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
f.  The county's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
g.  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
h.  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the county's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
i.  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
j.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable county, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
k.  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the county; 
l.  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the county; 
m.  Remedies available to the county to protect the county's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
n.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
o.  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the county and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
p.  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the county are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
q.  Such other provisions as the county determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. of 3-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 26-23. - General provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  Delegation. Consistent with applicable law, the commission shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The commission may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the commission shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(c)  Retroactivity. This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(d)  Applicability of other ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(e)  Effective date. This article shall become effective March 20, 2002. 
(Ord. of 3-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 26-24. - Franchise fee. 
The county, by and through its board of commissioners, shall hereby require collection of franchise fees at the rate of five percent of annual gross revenues generated by any cable or video service provider providing cable or video services within the unincorporated areas of the county pursuant to a state franchise or the maximum that may be subsequently allowed by law. 
(Res. of 3-4-08; Mo. of 1-20-09) 
Chapter 27 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 27-1. - Preamble. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the provisions of this chapter be construed to require respectful treatment of human remains in accord with the equal and innate dignity of every human being and consistent with the identifiable ethnic, cultural and religious affiliation of the deceased individual as indicated by the method of burial or other historical evidence or reliable information. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Burial ground means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The term shall include privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also means any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
Cemetery or cemeteries means any land or structure in this county dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Preserve and protect means to keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may also include the cleaning, maintenance and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-3. - Authority of county to preserve abandoned cemeteries. 
(a)  Where an abandoned cemetery or burial ground is within the unincorporated boundaries of the county, the county is authorized to preserve and protect any abandoned cemetery or any burial ground that has been abandoned or is not being maintained by the person who is legally responsible for its upkeep. In all cases where the county chooses to preserve and protect an abandoned cemetery or burial ground, the county shall expend public money in connection with, and shall gain reimburse of such funds by billing any legally responsible person or levying upon any of the property upon which the cemetery lies. 
(b)  In all cases where the county chooses to preserve and protect, or allows others to preserve and protect, an abandoned cemetery or burial ground, the county shall have the power of eminent domain to acquire any interest in land necessary for the purpose of allowing access to an abandoned cemetery or burial ground. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-4. - Permit required for developing land on which cemetery located. 
(a)  No land within 25 feet of a known cemetery boundary, burial ground boundary, human remains, or burial object shall of be knowingly disturbed by the owner or occupier of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located for the purposes of grading, re-directing the flow of water, logging, blasting, building, or like unless a permit is first obtained from the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No known cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial object shall be knowingly disturbed by the owner, occupier, or developer of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located for the purposes of developing or changing the use of any part of such land unless a permit is first obtained from the board of commissioners according to O.C.G.A. §§ 36-72-1 et seq. 
(c)  In addition to those penalties provided in paragraph (b), penalties for violation of this article shall be assessed in accordance with section 1-13 of the County Ordinance Code. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-5. - Creation. 
There is created a cemetery and burial oversight committee (hereinafter referred to as the "committee"). 
(Ord. of 5-13-97; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-6. - Membership; term of office; compensation of members; membership and appointment. 
The committee shall be composed of seven members. Each district commissioner from the board of commissioners shall appoint one member to the committee. Each member appointed by the board of commissioners shall serve for a one-year term, and may be appointed for additional one-year terms. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. The board of commissioners shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the committee. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-7. - Reserved. 
Sec. 27-8. - Officers. 
The committee shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until reelected or a successor is elected. The committee shall appoint a vice chairperson and secretary. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-9. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The committee shall be authorized with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Establishing a uniform procedure for the identification, preservation, protection and maintenance of cemeteries, graveyards and burying grounds, to include the following: 
a.  Formulate a countywide cemetery preservation plan including: 
b.  Determine the identification and location of all known cemeteries in the county. 
c.  Determine the status and needs of each cemetery and prioritize rehabilitation. 
d.  Establish and publish guidelines regarding cemetery preservation, maintenance, landscaping, security, development and other information. 
(2)  Serve as a part of the planning and zoning function of the county, include the following: 
a.  Assist the county planning and zoning section of the department of community development regarding the review of zoning and variance applications involving cemeteries or property immediately adjacent to cemeteries. 
b.  Provide recommendations to the planning commission, community development appeals board and board of commissioners on all zoning and variance applications within the purview of this article. 
c.  Assist the department of community development regarding the inspection and enforcement of all stipulations and conditions relating to the development of property containing cemeteries. 
d.  Establish appropriate and necessary liaisons and contacts with other appropriate boards, committees, departments, organizations and municipalities within the county. 
e.  Increase public awareness and support regarding cemetery preservation. 
(3)  Hear and review any application filed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-5, to include assisting in research and any legal action, as required, regarding cemetery relocation, maintenance and security measures as defined by state statute and county ordinances and provide guidance and suggestions to the board of commissioners relative to ordinances dealing with cemeteries. 
(4)  Provide guidance and suggestions to the board of commissioners regarding county ordinances and changes and updates to the state code relative to cemetery preservation. 
(5)  Upon completion of its cemetery preservation purposes, as set forth in subparagraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4), the committee shall undertake an initiative for the purpose of protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value in the county. The committee shall prepare an inventory of all property within the unincorporated county having the potential for designation as historic property to include the following: 
a.  Recommend to the board of commissioners specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
b.  Increase public awareness and support regarding historic preservation. 
c.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the board of commissioners may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of preserving historic resources. 
d.  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the county concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-10. - Meetings; rules of procedure. 
The committee shall adopt rules of procedures consistent with this article. Meetings of the committee shall be at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the members of the committee may determine. The chairperson or, in his absence, the vice-chairperson, or secretary may administer oaths. The committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The committee shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed with appropriate county administration and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-11. - Applications for developing land on which a cemetery is located. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby establishes and empowers the committee to hear and review any application filed pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-72-5. The committee shall conduct a public hearing within 60 days of the filing of an application and shall make a written recommendation to the board of commissioners no later than 15 days following the public hearing with respect to the sufficiency of the notice to descendants, the plan for mitigation, the disturbance and adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, the survey of the cemetery and plans for disinterment and reinterment. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall include, at a minimum, the information set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-5. 
(c)  An application fee of $75.00 shall be imposed for processing and reviewing the application. 
(d)  An appropriate number of copies of the application shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. The application shall be certified by the property owner or other applicable party that all the information is true and correct and the application for appeal may be void if any material information is untrue. The committee may recommend to the board of commissioners that the application be granted, modified, or denied. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application, the committee shall hold a public hearing for review of the application. 
(2)  The chairman may appoint a three person subcommittee to inspect the site where the removal of the cemetery is requested. After the inspection, the subcommittee shall then meet with the district commission from the board of commissioners in which district in the cemetery site is located. 
(3)  If a subcommittee is appointed, it shall report to the committee with its findings. 
(4)  The committee shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to recommend the granting of an application: 
a.  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
b.  The economic and other costs of preserving and protecting an abandoned cemetery or burial ground; 
c.  The proximity of the abandoned cemetery or burial ground to a paved, unimproved, or unused county road; and 
d.  Any other compelling factors that are relevant. 
(e)  Upon a decision on application by the committee, the applicant shall request that the board of commissioners review the application. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-12. - Issues considered by the board of commissioners in determining to preserve and protect an abandoned cemetery burial ground. 
The board of commissioners shall consider the recommendation of the committee in making its decision. The board of commissioners shall consider, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
(2)  The economic and other costs of preserving and protecting an abandoned cemetery or burial ground; 
(3)  The proximity of the abandoned cemetery or burial ground to a paved, unimproved, or unused county road; and 
(4)  Any other compelling factors that the board of commissioners deems relevant. The board of commissioners shall have 45 days to review the decision of the committee and make an official decision. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 19, 2002, amended the Code by renumbering § 27-5 as § 27-12. 
Sec. 27-13. - Appeal. 
Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the board of commissioners, he or she, within 30 days of such decision, may file an appeal in the superior court of the county in addition to the superior court enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-14. - Development activities pending appeal. 
Until the expiration of the time for appeal as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-11, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the board of commissioners. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the board of commissioners and the party seeking judicial review or upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Sec. 27-15. - Disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects. 
Any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted under this chapter shall be supervised, monitored, or carried out by the applicant's archeologist and shall be done at the expense of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-19-02, § 2) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county ordinance relative to emergency management adopted July 28, 1992, promulgates regulations pertaining to civil emergencies and emergency management and is published separately by the Carroll County emergency management agency. The purpose of the plan is to ensure preparedness, appropriate response and timely recovery from natural or manmade hazards that may affect the county. A copy of the plan is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Related laws reference— Enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system, art. V. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70. 

Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Authority of county to license, regulate and franchise. 
The governing authority of the county is hereby authorized to franchise by the granting of nonexclusive franchises to all persons, firms, and corporations doing business in ambulance service in the unincorporated area of the county. A franchise may be granted for all the unincorporated area of the county or for any portion of the unincorporated area of the county as may be established by the governing authority as a special franchise district. A special franchise district may be abolished, merged, modified, or redistricted by the governing authority by resolution after same has been established. The governing authority is hereby empowered to levy a franchise fee on franchised firms. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings described to them in this section: 
Advanced life support (ALS) for ambulance services, includes the services of basic life support (BLS) and advanced emergency care. ALS personnel provide: intravenous therapy, endotracheal intubation, anti-shock trousers, a cardiac monitor, cardiac defibrillator, drugs, relief of pneumothorax or other invasive procedures and services. 
Ambulance means any vehicle which is equipped to transport patients, in a reclining position, to or from health care facilities. 
Ambulance service means the providing of emergency care and transportation on the public streets and highways of this county for a wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated human being to or from a place where medical or hospital care is furnished. 
Base station physician means a physician authorized to practice under state guidelines, knowledgeable in the medical protocols, radio procedures and general operating policies of the EMS system, and a person from whom EMS personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote communication device. 
Cardiac technician means a person who, having been trained and certified as an emergency medical technician and having completed additional training in advanced cardiac life support techniques in a training course approved by the department of human resources, is so certified by the composite state board of medical examiners. 
Communications center means the single 911 public safety answering point (PSAP) facility that notifies first responders and dispatches ambulances operating in the service area. 
County means Carroll County, Georgia, which contains approximately 502 square miles and encompasses the cities of Bowdon, Carrollton, Mt. Zion, Roopville, Temple, Villa Rica, and Whitesburg. All areas of the county are considered part of this chapter. 
E-911 means the county emergency 911 system that facilitates the placing of calls by persons in need of emergency services to the applicant. 
Emergency means a request for ambulance services for non-convalescent requests for medical assistance that may include life-threatening conditions, limb-threatening conditions, or those conditions within the standard procedure as promulgated by the medical director. 
Emergency medical technician means a person who has been certified by the department of human resources of the state after having successfully completed emergency medical care training approved by that department. 
EMS means emergency medical service that provides emergency ambulance services. 
EMS system means the comprehensive coordinated arrangement of resources and functions to respond to medical emergencies and provide emergency ambulance service. 
First responder means the services providing initial response to medical emergencies by utilizing a rapid response unit, staffed and equipped to perform emergency medical procedures. 
Medical director means the licensed physician (or his/her designee) who has the responsibilities of medical director in accordance with state requirements. 
Medical priority dispatch system (MPDS) means that system to prioritize incoming medical calls and is approved by the medical director. 
Medical protocol means a written statement of standard procedure, promulgated by the medical director as the medical appropriate standard of out-of hospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Mutual aid agreement means a written agreement between providers of emergency medical services where the parties agree to provide EMS assistance to one another. 
Paramedic means any person who has been certified as an advanced emergency medical technician by the composite state board of medical examiners before July 1, 1988, or any person who has been certified by that board on or after July 1, 1988, as having been trained in emergency care techniques in a paramedic training course approved by the department of human resources, but all such persons shall be designated on or after July 1, 1988, as paramedics. 
Patient means an individual who is either ill, sick, injured, wounded, helpless, or otherwise incapacitated, and who is in need of, or is at risk of needing medical care or assessment during transportation to or from a health care facility, and who is reclining or should be transported in a reclining position. 
Person means any individual, firm partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than that of the United States. 
Public safety officers means any on duty, career or volunteer employee, of the Bowdon Police Department, county animal control, county E-911, county fire rescue and emergency management agency, county prison, county sheriff's department, Carrollton Fire Department, Carrollton Police Department, Mt. Zion Police Department, Temple Police Department, Villa Rica Police Department, and Whitesburg Police Department. 
Service Area means that area which is contained within the boundaries of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-3. - Applicability of article generally. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all emergency ambulances operated within the county, but shall not apply to ambulance service or calls for service operated by county and shall not apply to vehicles operated solely for non-emergency services. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-4. - Requirement of franchise. 
No person shall operate an ambulance or ambulance service within the unincorporated limits of county without first obtaining from the board of commissioners a franchise as herein provided. This article shall not prevent ambulance service located outside of the county from picking up a patient outside of the county and bringing the patient into the county. This article will not prevent any ambulance service located outside the county from occasionally responding to an emergency call in the county pursuant to a mutual aid agreement. This article will not prevent any ambulance service located outside the county from picking up a patient in the county for transfer to a location outside the county either as an emergency or as a nonemergency transfer. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-5. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Each franchise granted under this division will be a nonexclusive franchise. The county does not agree to restrict the number of franchises in all or any part of the county for any person, firm or corporation in the same business, a competing business or any related business. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-6. - Application; requirements for issuance of franchise. 
An application for a franchise under this article shall be made with the clerk of the board of commissioners of the county by petition, which shall set forth the name, address and place of business of the applicant, if an individual, and if a partnership the name and address and place of business of each partner, and the place of business, and if a corporation, the name and address of each of the officers of the corporation, and the place of business of such corporation; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the name of the insurance company with which the applicant has made arrangements to secure insurance as required by the provisions set forth herein; together with the following information: 
(1)  Written and proof that all personnel of applicant will provide ambulance services are certified emergency medical technicians, cardiac technicians or paramedics as those positions are certified by the state department of human resources, and comply with the provisions set forth in section 34-7; 
(2)  Written assurance and proof that each ambulance to be used by applicant within the county is certified by the state department of human resources and complies with the provisions set forth in section 34-8; 
(3)  Written assurance and proof that applicant will maintain within the county limits a minimum of three 24-hour, seven day per week ALS units ambulances, neither of which shall exceed 60 months in age (remounted vehicles will be deemed new as of the date the chassis is originally titled), equipped and staffed to provide advanced life support services, as defined by the state department of human resources, at all times except when such ambulances services, in addition to written assurance and proof that each ambulance maintained hereunder shall be staffed by at least one paramedic or cardiac technician; 
(4)  Written assurance and proof that applicant is properly licensed by the state to provide ambulance services within state; 
(5)  Written assurance and proof that the applicant will either install mobile or make available portable radio units for each ambulance operated within the county which are capable of communications with law enforcement and fire department personnel and complies with the provisions set forth in section 34-9; 
(6)  Written assurance and proof that applicant will maintain a written log of requests for service calls and will in addition make such written records available for inspection by the county upon request all in order to determine compliance with the requirements hereunder; 
(7)  Written assurance and proof that all requirements of this article and all other applicable ordinances of the county and statutes of the state have been met and fully complied with in order to engage in ambulance services; 
(8)  Written assurance of state mandated workers' compensation insurance and proof of public liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,500,000.00 for one injury, not less than $1,500,000.00 for all injuries out of one accident, not less than $1,500,000.00 property damage, and not less than $1,500,000.00 for injuries caused by malpractice; 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-7. - Employees of applicant. 
(a)  Professional skills and training of personnel. Applicant shall require mandatory attendance of its personnel at in-service training and shall ensure that all field personnel working in the system possess appropriate understanding of the ambulance service system. 
(b)  Rights and responsibilities of field personnel. Professional field ambulance personnel shall have a direct linkage to those physicians who are empowered to oversee clinical policy and procedure. This direct linkage and personnel responsibility applies to compliance of vehicles, on board equipment, collection and recording of primary data. Personnel are prohibited from operating equipment that is substantially out of compliance with system standards, as provided through regional EMS council, personnel are prohibited from falsifying or omitting data from reports. 
(c)  Character and competence of employees. All persons employed by the applicant in the performance of work under this contract shall be competent and hold and maintain appropriate permits or certification for their professions. 
(d)  Professional conduct and dress. The applicant's employees and agents will provide courteous and professional conduct and appearance at all times. The ambulance service personnel shall have an adopted uniform to be worn when on duty with identifiable insignia indicating their level of certification as assigned by the state. Uniform styles shall be determined by the applicant. All field personnel must undergo physical examination and applicant is responsible for making sure its employees undergo blood and urine tests to determine the presence of illegal drug use at a frequency as county and applicant mutually determine. The requirements under OSHA regulations are the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-8. - Vehicle and equipment standards. 
(a)  Ambulances furnished under the agreement shall meet or exceed vehicle specifications as specified in the document entitled "Federal Specification Ambulance Emergency Medical Care Vehicle" as published by the General Service Administration, DOT Federal Specification KKK 1822 in effect at the time of manufacture. 
(b)  Each ambulance shall be equipped with all required equipment and supplies for operations as required by state and local regulations and approved medical protocols. The specific intent of this provision is to ensure that the applicant have adequate equipment to service the county. 
(c)  The applicant shall comply with or exceed the maintenance standards as outlined in Section 203 of the Standards Accreditation of Ambulance Services as published by the most recent edition of the Commission on the Accreditation of Ambulance Services. All costs of maintenance and repairs, including parts, supplies, labor, subcontracted services and costs of extended warranties shall be at the applicant's expense. 
(d)  The applicant shall establish policies and procedures to insure that all ambulances are maintained in a reasonably clean manner both interior and exterior at all times. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-9. - Communications. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall be equipped with a mobile radio with radio frequency approved by the E-911 director that can communicate with county E-911, and all other public safety agencies within the boundaries of the county. Each ambulance crew shall have a portable radio and/or pager which can be accessed by county E-911. The E-911 center shall not be responsible for the dispatching or coordination of any convalescent or non-emergency radio traffic or units. The E-911 center shall be responsible for only those units assigned to the center for emergency calls. 
(b)  The county shall provide the Applicant with 24-hour per day emergency dispatch along with time and voice recordings (maintained for 30 days only). The county will furnish to the applicant that information and or documentation without charge. 
(c)  The applicant shall maintain a radio frequency license with the appropriate authorities that is compatible with county E-911. 
(d)  Any expense incurred to maintain the communications link between the applicant and E-911 shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall furnish and ensure the continuous reliable availability of a medical director and on-line medical control with the emergency room concerned with the call. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-10. - Data collection and reporting required. 
Applicant's data collection and reporting systems shall meet the following minimum standards, excepting that information that is privileged and confidential by law, which reports shall be furnished to the county upon request. Applicant shall maintain complete records and provide reasonable access to county as requested, including: 
(1)  Each request for service; 
(2)  Equipment failure reports; 
(3)  Vehicle maintenance records; 
(4)  Patient account records; 
(5)  Deployment planning reports; 
(6)  Continuing education and certification records documenting training compliance; 
(7)  Summary of clinical/service inquiries and resolutions; and 
(8)  Verification of drug free workplace compliance. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-11. - Franchise fee. 
Together with the written application described herein, applicant shall submit to the clerk of the board of commissioners by certified check a $1,500.00 processing fee to cover expenses of investigation and processing of the application and defer the costs to the county of administering this ordinance, which fee shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-12. - Approval and denial of license; public hearing. 
Upon determination by the clerk of the board of commissioners that the application is complete as to form, it shall be presented to and received by the board of commissioners at a regular meeting and shall either be granted, if the application is found to comply with the provisions of this article and if the board of commissioners in their legitimate discretion determine that such issuance is in the best interest of the citizens of the county, or denied at such meeting, or any subsequent meeting if the matter is tabled or otherwise postponed. The board of commissioners may, in their discretion, call for, advertise and hold a public hearing in order to receive comments on the proposed application for franchise prior to decision. If the application for franchise is approved by the board of commissioners, the application will be returned to the clerk of the board of commissioners with the board of commissioners approval thereon. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-13. - Hearings. 
All hearings under this division will be held as public hearings before the board of commissioners of the county. All persons desiring to be heard will be heard and any person appearing at the hearing may be represented by an attorney. The hearing may be adjourned to a later date for completion of debate and all action of the board of commissioners relating to this hearing will be open to the public. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-14. - Revocation. 
(a)  The franchise issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the board of commissioners after reasonable notice to the licensee and opportunity for a hearing thereon for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in conjunction with the provision of ambulance services hereunder; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in conjunction with the provision of ambulance service hereunder; 
(3)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Conducting the business franchise pursuant to the provisions of this article in an unlawful manner, in a manner to constitute a public nuisance, or in manner to constitute a breach of peace or constitute a menace to the health, safety or the general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a franchise shall be given in writing to the franchisee, setting forth specifically the grounds of the compliant and the time, date and place of the hearing thereon. Such notice shall be served on the franchisee by handing the same to the person in charge of the franchised business or by mailing the same, postage prepaid to the franchise at his last known address or to the designated agent for the service of process or the registered agent of the franchisee, at least five (5) days prior to the date set forth the hearing. 
(c)  Such service of the notice shall suspend the license pending the outcome of the hearing, and any business operation conducted pursuant to the provisions of the franchise shall promptly cease and terminate. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-15. - Renewal. 
Any franchise granted under this article, after issuance, must be renewed annually not later than January 1 of each year; and such franchise shall be considered for renewal only in the event a current franchisee is in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this article and all other appropriate ordinances of the county and the laws of this state. Renewal shall comport with the requirements set forth in section 34-12 of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-16. - Nontransferable. 
No franchise under this article may be sold, transferred or assigned by franchise, or by operation of law, to any other person, firm or corporation. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such franchise, which will thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the franchisee is a partnership and one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of the franchise; and in such case the franchise, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name to the surviving partner. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-17. - Automatic revocation. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any license required by the franchisee to operate ambulance services, the franchisee granted herein shall be automatically revoked without further action by the board of commissioners or any other officer of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-18. - Inspection. 
The county may at any time during reasonable business hours inspect the records of the company to determine whether the company is complying with the terms of this article. At the request in writing of any patient who has ridden in an ambulance, the company will provide the account number or patient number applying to that patient. The county may copy at the county's expense, any company records that the county has a right to inspect. The county will not remove any records from the company's office without the consent of the company. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-19. - Term and renewal of franchise. 
The franchise will be in full force and effect from the _______ day of _______ _______, to the _______ day of _______, _______. This franchise may be renewed in its present form or under revised conditions at any time before or after its expiration. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-20. - Existing ambulance services. 
All existing ambulance services operating within the county on the date of the adoption of this division shall be required to comply with this division within 90 days of its adoption. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-21. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Notice. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the named person in the application. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $1000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 5-25-99) 
Sec. 34-22. - 911 charge. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless specified otherwise in this resolution, all terms shall be defined in the same manner as specified in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-122. 
(b)  9-1-1 Charges on monthly services. 
(1)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge and the amount of such 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of public safety answering point. 
(2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly 9-1-1 charge upon each telephone service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber, whose exchange access lines are in the areas served or which could be served by the 9-1-1 service. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(a)(1)(A), the amount of such 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per month per telephone service provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(3)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133(a), there is imposed a monthly wireless enhanced 9-1-1 charge upon each wireless telecommunications connection, other than a connection for prepaid wireless service, subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose place of primary use is within the geographic area that is served by Carroll County, Georgia, or that would be served by Carroll County, Georgia, for the purpose of such an emergency 9-1-1 system. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(a)(2)(A), the amount of such enhanced wireless 9-1-1 charge shall be $1.50 per month per wireless telecommunications connection provided to the telephone subscriber. 
(4)  The 9-1-1 charges under this section shall commence January 1, 2019. 
(c)  Collecting and remitting of 9-1-1 charges. All such 9-1-1 charges collected by service suppliers shall be remitted to the Georgia Department of Revenue, as the contracted collection partner of the Georgia Emergency Communications Authority, at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-185, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-186, and any other Georgia Department of Revenue or Georgia Emergency Communications Authority rule or regulation adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 38, ch. 113, art. 12, and O.C.G.A., tit. 50, ch. 13, the "Georgia Administrative Procedures Act." 
(d)  Depost and use of proceeds. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134, all proceeds received by Carroll County from 9-1-1 charges imposed by this resolution shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county; kept separate from general revenue of the county; and used exclusively for the statutorily authorized purposes. 
(e)  Resolution filing requirements. The clerk of the county shall file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this resolution within ten days of the adoption thereof. Any subsequent amendment to this resolution shall likewise be so filed by the clerk within ten days of the adoption thereof. 
(Res. of 5-8-01, §§ 1—3; Res. of 4-1-03, §§ 1—3; Res. of 4-5-05, §§ 1—3; Res. of 4-18-06, §§ 1—3; Res. of 4-3-07, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 4-15-08, §§ 1—3; Res. of 4-14-09, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 10-6-09; Res. of 6-7-11; Res. of 9-3-13, §§ 1—3; Res. of 9-2-14, §§ 1—3; Res. No. 9-1-15(1), §§ 1—3; Res. No. 9-6-16(1), §§ 1—3; Res. No. 9-5-17(1), §§ 1—3; Res. of 9-4-18(1), §§ 1—3; Res. of 9-4-18(2), §§ 1—5) 
Sec. 34-23. - National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The county hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the county to train, exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. of 11-15-05) 
Sec. 34-24. - County hazard mitigation plan. 
The county hazard mitigation plan (dated June 28, 2004) as approved by GEMA and FEMA Region IV, is hereby adopted. The plan is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(Mo. of 8-16-05; Res. of 1-4-11) 
Secs. 34-25—34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL DISASTER AND EMERGENCY ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res./Ord. of Dec. 2, 2003, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article II, sections 34-51—34-65, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 34-51. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to provide the necessary organization, powers, and authority to enable the timely and effective use of all county resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters and/or emergencies, natural or manmade, likely to affect the health, security, safety, or property of the county and its residents, whether such events occur within or without the corporate limits of the county. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § I) 
Sec. 34-52. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Building contractor shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Civil emergency shall include but not be limited to any condition of unrest, riot, civil disobedience, affray, unlawful assembly, hostile or military or paramilitary action, war, terrorism or sabotage. 
Disaster, whether natural or manmade, shall include but not be limited to flood, fire, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, severe high or low temperatures, water contamination or pollution, land contamination or pollution, air pollution, blizzard, landslide, mudslide, hurricane, building or structural collapse, high water table, pandemic disease, epidemic, riot, blight, drought, civil emergency, utility emergency, severe energy shortages, snow, ice, windstorm, hazardous substance spills or releases, chemical spills or releases, petroleum spills or releases, biological matter spills or releases, radiation releases or exposures, infestation, explosions, sabotage, mass transportation accidents or public health emergencies. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
Emergency means the imminent threat or occurrence of a disaster, civil emergency or utility emergency affecting the county and its residents and inhabitants where the chairman determines that the exercise or discharge of emergency or disaster powers is necessary to save lives, protect property, to protect the public health and safety, or to lessen or to avert the threat of a catastrophe or calamity within the county. 
Governor's state of emergency. The term "governor's state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), as a condition declared by the governor when, in the governor's judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Utility emergency shall include but not be limited to conditions which endanger or threaten to endanger the safety, potability, availability, transmission, distribution, treatment, or storage of water, natural gas, gas, fuel, electricity, communication, garbage or sewage. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § II) 
Sec. 34-53. - Emergency management and response powers. 
The chairman of the county board of commissioners is authorized, if the chairman finds that the county or any part thereof is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering a disaster, emergency, civil emergency, or utility emergency, to declare a local disaster or emergency and issue orders exercising the following authority: 
(1)  Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone, continue, or relocate all meetings of the board of commissioners, and any committee, commission, board, authority, or other county body as deemed appropriate by the chairman. 
(2)  Suspend or limit the sale, distribution, dispensing, or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives, and combustible products and require the closing of those businesses or parts of businesses insofar as the sale, distribution, dispensing, or transportation of these items is concerned. 
(3)  Establish a curfew during such hours of the days or nights and affecting such categories of persons as may be designated. 
(4)  Require closing of business establishments. 
(5)  Prohibit the sale or distribution within the county of any products which could be employed in a manner which would constitute a danger to public safety. 
(6)  Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, public parks or public ways. 
(7)  Temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than 60 days, any regulation or ordinance of the county, including, but not limited to, those regarding health, safety, and zoning. This period may be extended upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(8)  Control, restrict, allocate, or regulate the use, sale, production, or distribution of food, water, fuel, clothing, and/or other commodities, materials, goods, services, and resources. 
(9)  Suspend or limit burning of any items or property within the county unincorporated limits. 
(10)  Require emergency services of any county officer or employee. If regular county forces are determined to be inadequate, then to acquire the services of such other personnel as the chairman can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law to other registered and identified disaster emergency workers. 
(11)  Utilize all available resources of the county as reasonably necessary to manage the disaster or emergency. 
(12)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened areas within the county if the chairman deems this action is necessary for the preservation of life, property, or other disaster or emergency mitigation, response or recovery and to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection with an evacuation. 
(13)  Purchase or lease materials, supplies, or equipment during the local disaster or emergency, and to authorize any or all agencies or county officials to directly purchase or lease those materials, supplies, or equipment essential to continue the work of the county involved without the advertisement of bids. 
(14)  Hire and contract for construction, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, and/or other services essential to continue the work of the county without the advertisement of bids. 
(15)  Make application for local, state, or federal assistance. 
(16)  Establish and control routes of transportation, ingress or egress. 
(17)  Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster or emergency area or home, building or structures located therein. 
(18)  Utilize private property as necessary to cope with emergency or disaster conditions, subject to any requirements established by law for compensation. 
(19)  Appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, authorize the obtaining and acquisition of property, equipment, services, supplies, and materials without strict compliance with procurement regulations or procedures, public works laws, and public bidding laws. 
(20)  Transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of county departments and agencies for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency or disaster services. 
(21)  Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies, and/or materials whether from private, nonprofit, or governmental sources. 
(22)  Hire or contract for construction, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, and/or other professional or construction services essential to the continuation of activities of the county without the advertising of bids or compliance with procurement requirements, public works laws, and public bidding laws. 
(23)  Terminate or suspend any process, operation, machine, device, or event that is or may negatively impact the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the county. 
(24)  Delegate authority to such county officials as the chairman determines reasonably necessary, convenient, or expedient. 
(25)  Require the continuation, termination, disconnection, or suspension of natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, communication or other public utilities or infrastructure. 
(26)  Close or cancel the use of any county owned or operated building or other public facility. 
(27)  Disinfect, abate, demolish, remove or clean up any building, structure, site, wreckage or debris. 
(28)  Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to public health. 
(29)  Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of emergency or disaster including the waiving of compliance with any time-consuming procedures and formalities, including notices, as may be prescribed by law. 
(30)  Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other functions and activities as the chairman reasonably believes is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the county or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects of any emergency or disaster. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-13, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § III) 
Sec. 34-54. - Filing of declaration. 
Any declaration of disaster emergency issued by the chairman shall be promptly filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners and the public should be notified through available media of said declaration. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § IV) 
Sec. 34-55. - Effective term of declaration. 
The declaration of a local disaster or emergency shall be in effect for a period of up to 30 days. this period may be extended by the chairman only upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § V) 
Sec. 34-56. - Succession of authority. 
If the chairman is unavailable, the vice-chairman of the board of commissioners shall have said authority, followed by the member of the board of commissioners having held that elected office for the longest period of time. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § VI) 
Sec. 34-57. - Building contractor registration required. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business, in a governor's state of emergency in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the building official and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(b)  All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a governor's state of emergency or the period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, which shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration, shall register and file applications with the building official, or his designee, at the department of community development. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the building official with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(c)  Building contractor registration fees, during a period of a governor's state of emergency are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § VII) 
Sec. 34-58. - Overcharging prohibited. 
(a)  Overcharging prohibited. In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a governor's state of emergency or period during which the disaster in the county continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, which shall not exceed six months, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(b)  Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § VIII) 
Sec. 34-59. - Prohibited conduct during disaster or emergency. 
During the period an actual or impending local disaster or emergency has been declared, no person shall: 
(1)  Enter or remain upon the premises of any establishment not open for business to the general public, unless such person is the owner or agent of the establishment. 
(2)  Violate any of the orders duly issued by the chairman or authorized personnel. 
(3)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any duly authorized peace officer, building official, code enforcement officer, or other authorized personnel in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, or any order or regulation issued under authority provided for in this article. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § IX) 
Sec. 34-60. - Location of board of commissioners meetings and department. 
(a)  Whenever an emergency or disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of the county at its regular locations, the board of commissioners may meet at any place, inside or outside the unincorporated limits of the county. Any temporary disaster meeting location for the board of commissioners shall continue until a new location is established or until the emergency or disaster is terminated and the board of commissioners is able to return to its normal location. 
(b)  Whenever an emergency or disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the affairs of any department of the county at its regular location, such department may conduct its business at any place, inside or outside the unincorporated limits of the county, and may remain at the temporary location until the emergency or disaster is declared ended or until the department is able to return to its normal location. 
(c)  Any official act or meeting required to be performed at any regular location of the board of commissioners or of its departments shall be valid when performed at any temporary location established under this article. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § X) 
Sec. 34-61. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The chairman may, on behalf of the county, enter into such reciprocal aid, mutual aid, joint powers agreements, intergovernmental assistance agreements, or other compacts, plans, or agreements with other governmental entities for the protection of life and property. Such agreements may include the furnishing or exchange of supplies, equipment, facilities, personnel, and/or services. 
(b)  The board of commissioners or any of its committees, commissions, or authorities may exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of the emergency or disaster and may waive compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § XI) 
Sec. 34-62. - Authority to enter property. 
During the period of a declared emergency or disaster, a county employee or authorized agent may enter onto or upon private property if the employee or authorized agent has reasonable grounds to believe that there is a true emergency or disaster and an immediate need for assistance for the protection of life or property, and that entering onto the private land will allow the employee or authorized agent to take such steps to alleviate or minimize the emergency or disaster or to prevent or minimize risk or danger to lives or property from the declared emergency or disaster. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § XII) 
Sec. 34-63. - Scope and application. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all boards, commissions, committees, authorities, and officers under the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  This article shall apply to the extent that any orders, rules, or regulations authorized by this article are not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or by any state agency exercising a power delegated to it by him. Furthermore, any orders, rules, or regulations authorized by this article that are inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or by any state agency exercising a power delegated to it by him shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent that the conflict exists. 
(c)  In order to attain uniformity so far as practicable throughout the country in measures taken to aid emergency management, all orders, rules, and regulations made pursuant thereto shall be taken or made with due consideration to the orders, rules, regulations, actions, recommendations, and requests of federal authorities relevant thereto and, to the extent permitted by law, shall be consistent with such orders, rules, regulations, actions, recommendations, and requests. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § XIII) 
Sec. 34-64. - Authority for enforcement. 
The law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction, the county health department, the county environmental health department, the fire rescue department, or such other persons as authorized by the chairman of the board of commissioners, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the orders, rules, and regulations made or issued pursuant to this article. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § XIV) 
Sec. 34-65. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense for each day the violations continue. 
(Res./Ord. of 12-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-13, § XV) 
Sec. 34-66—34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES REVIEW COMMITTEE 

Sec. 34-81. - Creation. 
The county emergency medical services (EMS) review committee is established by the county board of commissioners for the purpose of advising the chairman of the county commission on matters relating to the development and coordination of the emergency medical services system that serves the residents of the county. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-82. - Mission. 
The mission of the committee is to protect the public health and welfare by ensuring that prompt, quality, and coordinated emergency medical services are provided to the residents of the county. This mission is achieved through the systematic examination of service delivery procedures, equipment, and processes toward the goal of developing and maintaining high quality emergency medical care. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-83. - Functions and duties. 
Functions and duties of the EMS committee shall be to: 
(1)  Recommend goals and objectives for a coordinated emergency medical services system. 
(2)  Review and make recommendations for system improvements from the emergency medical services quality assurance data, medical best practice standards, and other such data as needed. 
(3)  Improve the emergency medical services system by increased communications between the system members (i.e. EMS zone provider, E-911 Communications, fire/rescue, EMA, etc.) 
(4)  Review and analysis of EMS zone provider's response times and other operational data on a regular basis. 
(5)  Review and make recommendations of any EMS zone provider's operational issues brought to the attention of the committee. 
(6)  Review and make recommendations for the improvement of the EMS zone provider's services to the county. 
(7)  Increase community awareness of the EMS system in the county. 
(8)  Review and make recommendations to ensure that EMS system personnel are prepared to respond to disasters, acts of terrorism, and other hazards. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-84. - Membership. 
(a)  Members. The voting members of the EMS committee shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Chief of Carroll County Fire Rescue; 
(2)  Chief of City of Carrollton Fire Department; 
(3)  Director of Carroll County E-911; 
(4)  Director of Carroll County Emergency Management Agency (EMA); 
(5)  Current EMS zone provider. 
Non-voting members shall be the county emergency medical director and Tanner Health System. 
Any voting member of the EMS committee may be represented with full voting rights by a designated member of his/her respective agency if the voting member is unable to attend a meeting. 
(b)  Attendance. Members missing more than four meetings in one fiscal year without a designee present shall be deemed to have excessive absences. In the event that a member has excessive absences, the chair shall correspond with the respective appointing authority for the agency reporting the absences. 
(c)  Compensation. The members shall receive no compensation for serving on the EMS committee. 
(d)  Terms. Each member of the EMS committee shall serve as long as he/she holds the position established for the members. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-85. - Officers and duties. 
(a)  The committee shall elect from its membership at the first meeting of the committee each calendar year a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary for one-year terms who will serve immediately upon election. Officers may succeed himself or herself. If a vacancy occurs, the EMS review committee shall fill the office from its membership to complete the unexpired term. 
(b)  Duties. The powers and duties of the officers shall be as follows: 
(1)  Chair. It shall be the duty of the chair to set the meeting schedule for each fiscal year. The chair shall conduct the meetings. The chair shall appoint all ad hoc sub-committees necessary. The chair shall be the primary liaison between the committee and the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Vice-chair. The vice-chair shall assume the duties of the chair should the chair be not present at any meeting. 
(3)  Secretary. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the committee and shall distribute same in a timely manner to the committee. The secretary shall be responsible for ensuring proper advertising of the meetings as required by the Georgia Open Meetings Act and shall additionally perform such other administrative tasks as requested by the chair in the furtherance of the work of the committee. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-86. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held quarterly. Additional meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or as directed by the EMS review committee. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the simplified Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  Quorum. A quorum of EMS review committee shall be three voting members or voting member designees. Official action may not be taken in the absence of a quorum. The EMS review committee may act by majority vote of the members in attendance if a quorum of members is present. 
(c)  Requirements. All meetings of the EMS review committee must comply with the requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings (O.C.G.A. ch. 50-14) and Open Records (O.C.G.A. ch. 50-18) Laws. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-87. - Operating year. 
The operating year for the EMS Committee shall be January 1 until December 31. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Sec. 34-88. - Amendments. 
Proposed amendments to this article shall be presented in writing by any person to the chair with a copy to the secretary, who shall then notify all members of the proposed amendments in writing. Proposed amendments shall be brought before the committee not sooner than 30 days thereafter. Approval of any amendment to this article shall require the affirmative vote of no fewer than four voting members of the committee and approval by the board of commissioners. Amendments so adopted shall become effective immediately upon approval. 
(Res. of 6-2-15) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; natural resources, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; design standards for greenspace lands, § 86-141 et seq.; zoning, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 5-2-2017(1) repealed and replaced art. II, §§ 38-6—38-15, in its entirety. Former art. II pertained to "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control," and was derived from Res./Ord. of 2-2-10, § 1. 
Cross reference— Erosion Control requirements for roads and bridges, § 74-34. 

Sec. 38-6. - Title. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived will be known as "Carroll County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-7. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section IV.C. [38-9(c)]. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section III, paragraph 5 [38-8(5)]. 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-8. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section IV.C. [38-9(c)(15), (16)], no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (100; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-9. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Section IV B. and C. [38-9(b), (c)]. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans shall conform to Section IV D. [38-9(d)] and require construction site operators to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in Section IV B. and C. [38-9(b), (c)] shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to Section 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section IV.B.2. [38-9(b)(2)]; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (c)(16) and (17), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single—family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this Code, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this subsection maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section IV.B. and C. [38-9(b), (c)]. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1); Ord. of 7-10-18(1)) 
Sec. 38-10. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the department of community development to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the department of community development and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section V.C. [subsection (c)]. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section IV.B. and C. [38-9(b), (c)] will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section IV.C. 15, 16 and 17 [38-9(c)(15), (16), (17)] have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section V.B.6. [subsection (b)(6)], have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section IV.B. and C. [38-9(b), (c)], or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section IV.C. 15, 16 and 17 [38-9(c)(15), (16), (17)] are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section V.B.6. [subsection (b)(6)] are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-11. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The department of community development will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The department of community development shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-12. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section V.B.6. [38-10(b)(6)]. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-13. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-14. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the magistrate court within 20 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Sec. 38-15. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. The ordinance from which this article is derived shall become effective on the 2 nd day of May, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2017(1)) 
Secs. 38-16—38-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIMBER AND PULPWOOD HARVESTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 3, 2002, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former art. III, §§ 38-46—38-48, and adding a new art. IV to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and carried no history notes. 
Cross reference— Timber tax, § 90-1. 
State Law reference— Assessment of standing timber, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5. 

Sec. 38-46. - Notice of timber harvesting operations required. 
All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county prior to entering onto the property if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. 
(Ord. of 12-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 8-11-15(1)) 
Sec. 38-47. - Content of such notice and related procedures. 
(a)  Any person or firm harvesting timber for each separate tract to be harvested, shall be in such form as prescribed by the standard form promulgated by the director of the state forestry commission. 
(b)  Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission via electronic mail, or such other means as approved by the governing authority, or by mail. 
(Ord. of 12-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 8-11-15(1)) 
Sec. 38-48. - Bonds or letters of credit required. 
(a)  All persons or firms subject providing notice shall deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this section. Notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the director of the department of community development (hereinafter referred to as "director"), a valid surety bond for the year in which the harvesting operations are conducted, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county, against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount specified by the county in the amount of $5,000.00 upon a form approved by the county attorney. In the alternative, the person or firm harvesting timber may submit a valid irrevocable letter of credit for one year issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. No more than one bond is required from each person or firm harvesting timber regardless of the number of tracts harvested in unincorporated Carroll County by each such person or firm so long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the county or its designated agent no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that the county filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, the county shall immediately provide notice thereof, including the date such claim was filed, to the person or firm causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile, or by e-mail. 
(b)  Such surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall protect the county against damage, including but not to be limited by, the costs of removal of any obstruction or encroachment upon a public road, the costs of repairs to the public road directly incurred by the county, including any costs associated with traffic management such as flagging, signing, or provision of detours that are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the county road system. 
(c)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the unincorporated area of the county upon receipt of the same by the director and, if applicable, compliance with the requirement of subsection (a), and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of notice shall be reported to the director within three business days after such change. 
(d)  Notice requirements shall be applicable to any such timber harvested on or after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 8-11-15(1)) 
Sec. 38-49. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, encroach upon, solicit the sale of any merchandise on, or injure materially any part of any public road. For purposes of this section, the term "obstruct" shall include without limitation the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures said public road shall be responsible for reimbursing the county which is part of a county road system for the costs of removal of any obstruction or encroachment and the costs of repairs to the public road incurred by the county, including any costs associated with traffic management; provided, however, that such costs shall be limited to those costs which are directly incurred from such damages. Costs incurred for traffic management may include, but not be limited to, costs incurred for flagging, signing, or provision of detours, provided that these activities are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the county road system. 
(c)  Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. of 12-3-02, § 2) 
Secs. 38-50—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT IN MS4 PERMITTED AREAS 

Sec. 38-61. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area, groundwater recharge area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits"; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution. 
Therefore, the county has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. Pursuant to GaNOI GAG6100000, it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-62. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below throughout the MS4 permitted area of the county. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by corridor development overlay; or, 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a and b above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the county. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The county department of public works and/or the county department of community development is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The county will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-63. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Aquifer means any stream (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. (Note: This is the same definition used in the Groundwater Use Act). 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the county or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Environmental health manager. This position refers to the current department head holding the title "environmental health county manager." 
Erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Groundwater recharge area. Synonymous with "aquifer recharge area." An area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including exempt practices as described in subsection 38-62(b)(2). 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the county to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map(s) means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas are areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 Edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves, and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-64. - Groundwater recharge area protection. 
(a)  Introduction. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of the county's water resources be ensured for public use. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources of the county. 
(b)  Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established that shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are mapped as significant groundwater recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 Edition. 
(c)  Determination of pollution susceptibility. Groundwater recharge areas in the county are located in low pollution susceptibility areas, based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 Edition. 
(d)  Submittal requirements. With the exception of activities identified in (3) below that are exempt from this article, any land-disturbing activity in a groundwater recharge area district shall identify the groundwater recharge area district on any submittals to the county including, but not limited to a site plan, preliminary plat, or a final plat, depending on the nature of the development. 
The following information, in addition to any other requirements for site plans, preliminary plats, or final plats per the county development regulations, is required for all development within groundwater recharge areas: 
(1)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(2)  All development activities or site work conducted after site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat approval shall conform to specifications of said site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat. Significant changes to the site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat that alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in an increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval by Carroll County. 
(3)  The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
a.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
b.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(e)  Groundwater protection standards. 
(1)  New waste disposal facilities must have synthetic lines and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  A SCS approved liner must be provided for new agricultural waste impoundments exceeding 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resources conservation service. 
(3)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(4)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD). New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in the amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(5)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 660 gallons must have secondary containment of 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(6)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter referred to as DHR manual) and this article. 
(7)  Minimum lot size for new homes served by an individual septic tank/drain field system will be based on table MT-1 of the DHR manual and the criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas, A through D. Minimum lot or space size for mobile homes served by an individual septic tank/drain field system will be based on table MT-2 of the DHR manual and the criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas, A through D. Section M, lot sizing of the DHR manual states in the criteria for protection of groundwater area, that if a local government requires a larger lot size than that required by (2A) of the DHR manual for homes or (2B) of the DHR manual for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. Section M, lot sizing of the DHR manual is included as an addendum to this article. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-65. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the county a permit application on a form provided by the county for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection 38-64(b); 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection 38-64(c); 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection 38-64(d), if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection 38-64(e), if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 38-64(f). 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer shall meet with the county community development for a preliminary construction meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This preliminary construction meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
The county's subdivision regulations, watershed overlay, greenspace overlay (if applicable), and other applicable ordinances shall apply in addition to this article. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 38-66. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. In addition to the requirements of this article, the requirements set forth in chapter 86, article X of the Carroll County Code of Ordinances must be met. 
The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 38-66; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 38-66 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 38-66; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan. An erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan in accordance with Code chapter 38, article II and NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and green space plan. Applicants shall incorporate the county's corridor development plan, art. IV and county zoning 5.17. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. A operations and maintenance plan setting forth a detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved must be submitted. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the county as provided in subsection (d) below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement, exhibit A attached to an ordinance of January 6, 2015, binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d). 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the county that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection, maintenance agreements or maintenance in-lieu of agreement. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the county requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the county, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, exhibit A attached to an ordinance of January 6, 2015, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site and shall run with the land. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the county prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the county may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 38-67 of this article. 
The county, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of existing or future stormwater management facilities which services county right-of-way to include storm sewer piping to stormwater detention facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this and other ordinances deemed necessary to include adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the county. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection 38-64(a) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The county shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the county shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the county that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the county may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The county shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the county; and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 38-66(2). 
(f)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the county which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the county that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-66. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in chapter 86, art. X (where applicable), the following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the county are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection 38-65(b) is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the county before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the county may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection 38-65(a). The applicant may, if approved by the county, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-67. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the county or conducted and certified by the applicant's design professional of the plan approved by the county. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or final plat approval, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices including all infrastructure dedicated to the county per Carroll Code section 86-26 after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the county is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-68. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the county shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the County may correct the violation as provided in subsection (b). 
Inspection programs by the county may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the county to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the county. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the county, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The county may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 38-69. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the county determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the county by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the county shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the county may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The county may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The county may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The county may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the county may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the county has taken one or more of the actions described above, the county may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the county may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res./Ord. of Oct. 21, 2003, § 1, repealed chapter 42, section 42-1, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 42, sections 42-1—42-14. Former chapter 42 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of Nov. 10, 1983. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66; open burning, § 82-4. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70. 

Sec. 42-1. - Fire department—Created; duties. 
There is hereby created the county fire department. It shall be referred to as Carroll County Fire Rescue and EMA. The fire department shall employ personnel and maintain equipment at county expense for the suppression of fires, for fire prevention through inspection and public education, for emergency medical service and for investigation of fire causes. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-2. - Fire chief; inspectors, investigators; emergency employees. 
(a)  Fire chief. There is hereby created the office of fire chief. Except as otherwise required by law, the fire chief shall be in charge of the fire department and shall be responsible for the operation of that department. The fire chief shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Employees. The fire chief shall employ such employees as are required for the operation of the fire department. The procedure for the hiring and employment of such personnel shall be that set forth in the county civil service personnel policies and the fire department standard operating guidelines, as amended. 
(c)  Inspectors and investigators. The fire chief may designate inspectors and investigators who shall check for violations of this chapter and any other county code requirements dealing with fire and life safety. The fire chief may assist local government entities and authorities within the county with inspections and investigations upon request. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-3. - Arson arrests. 
The fire chief or other designated employees acting under his authority shall be sworn as peace officers with the power of arrest for crimes relating to arson. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-4. - Authority to cut utility wires. 
While engaged in the suppression of a fire, or control of a dangerous situation or other emergency scene, the fire chief or the fire chief's designated agent is authorized to terminate any electrical, telephone or cable service considered necessary for reasons of safety. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-5. - Standard fire code adopted by reference. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as adopted by the state, in its entirety including all applicable appendices. At least one copy of the fire prevention code is on file in the office of the fire department. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the standards and requirements adopted set forth in subsection (a), effective January 1, 2006, the minimum fire flow for all buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings will be specified in Table B105.1 of the International Fire Code. A reduction in the required fire flow rate to a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute may be allowed where the building or structure is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with chapter 9 of the International Fire Code. Subsection 42-5(b) shall be in full force and effect until December 31, 2010, at which time it shall expire and be repealed in its entirety. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1; Res./Ord. of 12-20-05, § 3) 
Sec. 42-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this chapter the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. The fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  The board of commissioners hereby designates the fire chief and the persons assigned and fulfilling the positions thereunder, including but not limited to, inspectors and investigators as those responsible for completing, signing, issuing, and serving citations for the purposes of enforcing this chapter. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-7. - Burning of certain materials prohibited. 
No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases such as nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere may be burned within the county. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-8. - Open burning. 
(a)  In general. Unless otherwise exempted, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building, unless the person has obtained a permit from the state forestry commission in advance. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the persons responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or the fire chief's duly designated agent. During the existence of windy or dry weather conditions, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be permitted. 
(b)  Open burning on premises heretofore described shall require a person in charge of such open burning to be physically present, with an effective means of controlling the fire immediately available and no fire shall be started or allowed to burn nearer than 30 feet from a property line or any structure. 
(c)  All such open burning shall be attended until the last embers of the fire have been extinguished; provided further that all such burning will be in conformity with state air quality control rules and regulations. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-9. - Obstructing fire hydrants or fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building materials or in any other manner whatsoever within 15 feet of any cistern or fire hydrant, which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any post or structure of any nature whatsoever within 18 inches of any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the fire chief. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with any vehicle or other object any designated fire lane. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-10. - Restrictions within the vicinity of a fire, dangerous conditions or emergency scene. 
No person except duly authorized representatives of the fire department, or representatives of any law enforcement agencies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire, dangerous condition or emergency scene, unless specifically authorized by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person found to have refused the orders and directions of the fire chief or the officer in charge of a fire, dangerous condition or emergency scene shall be guilty of violating this chapter. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-11. - Following fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet or park such vehicle within 500 feet of any parked emergency vehicle at the scene of an alarm. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-12. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid on any street, roadway or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-13. - Obstructing firehouse exitway or fire equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to park any vehicle or place any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of the firehouse exitway. It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or knowingly to obstruct or restrict or place an obstruction of any nature whatsoever that obstructs or restricts the movement of fire equipment. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 42-14. - Malfunctioning fire alarms, fee therefor. 
(a)  Recognizing that there are excessive costs incurred when the fire department responds to a false alarm and recognizing further that numerous false alarms are initiated by malfunctioning alarm systems, the fire department is authorized to assess a fee for false alarms which result in unnecessary responses by fire equipment as follows: 
(1)  The third false alarm in any calendar month and subsequent false alarms occurring on the same day as the third false alarm—$50.00 each for such false alarm. 
(2)  Subsequent false alarms up to and including five in the calendar month—$75.00 each for such false alarm. 
(3)  Each subsequent alarm in excess of five in the calendar month—$100.00. 
(b)  No fee shall be assessed for false alarms caused by storms, power losses, or malfunctioning of telephone lines provided that the occupant/owner shall act responsibly and promptly to correct the malfunction or shall notify the fire department of the false nature of the alarm in time to prevent the equipment from responding. The burden of establishing the fact of such malfunction or act of God rests upon the occupant/owner of the subject property. 
(c)  The fees set forth herein shall be assessed against the occupant of the facility from which the false alarm originates. The penalty for failure to remit the fine imposed by the fire department within 30 days of its imposition shall be as set forth in section 42-7 of this chapter. 
(Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(1), § 1) 
Chapter 46 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 30; environment, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-26. - Statutory authorization of article. 
The legislature of the state has in O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, as amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 46-27. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 46-28. - Statement of purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 46-29. - Objectives of article. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 46-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition to an existing building means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, ARIA, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade, below ground level, on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before August 2, 1988. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before August 2, 1988. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including the basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after October 25, 1990. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 2, 1988. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction and substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets, and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other part of a structure, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during the life of a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Violation means a failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 2; Ord. of 5-3-16(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-31. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 46-32. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), #130464 0001-008, dated August 11, 1978, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 46-33. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § C) 
Sec. 46-34. - Compliance with article and applicable regulations. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § D) 
Sec. 46-35. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § E) 
Sec. 46-36. - Interpretation and application of article. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 46-37. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § G) 
Sec. 46-38. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished according to the provisions of section 1-13. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Jurisdiction for all offenses under this article shall be in the county magistrate's court. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 3, § H) 
Secs. 46-39—46-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 46-51. - Designation of code and ordinance enforcement officer. 
The code and ordinance enforcement officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provision of this article. The county code and ordinance enforcement officer or his designee shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 46-52. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the code and ordinance enforcement officer on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. The code and ordinance enforcement officer shall approve or deny the application for a development permit within 60 days of its filing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. The applicant shall provide the following: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including the basement, of all structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 46-67; and 
d.  Description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. In the construction stage the following shall be provided: A floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where the structure is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high-hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the code and ordinance enforcement officer a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as-built, in relation to mean sea level. Such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, such certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The code and ordinance enforcement officer shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 4, § B; Ord. of 5-3-16(1)) 
Sec. 46-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the code and ordinance enforcement officer. 
Duties of the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 46-52(2). 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, to which the new and substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 46-52(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, in accordance with section 46-67(2). 
(8)  When interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-32, then the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. Certification shall be provided showing the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) is elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the code and ordinance enforcement officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 4, § C; Ord. of 5-3-16(1)) 
Sec. 46-54. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The code and ordinance enforcement appeals board, as established by the county, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The code and ordinance enforcement appeals board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the code and ordinance enforcement officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or any taxpayer aggrieved by the decision of the code and ordinance enforcement appeals board may appeal such decision to the superior court, as provided in state law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for subsection (h)(1) and (h)(4) of this section, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical designation. 
(e)  In passing upon such applications, the code and ordinance enforcement appeals board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(f)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsections (a)—(e) of this section, and the purpose of this article, the code and ordinance enforcement appeals board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. In the instance of a historical building, a determination must be made that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The code and ordinance enforcement officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 4, § D) 
Secs. 46-55—46-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 46-66. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction, as contained in this article. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 5, § A) 
Sec. 46-67. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 46-32 or section 46-53(9), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3). 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 46-53(7). 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation. 
c.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles are as follows: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
b.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3.  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of subsections (4)b.1 and (4)b.3. 
c.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either. 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (4)a.1 or (4)b.1. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 
(5)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-32 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (5)a. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 46-66(2), and the elevation standards of subsection (1) and the encroachment standards of subsection (5)a. are met. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 5, § B; Ord. of 5-3-16(1)) 
Sec. 46-68. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-32, where small streams exist but where no base flood data have been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 46-53(9). 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 5, § C) 
Sec. 46-69. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
Standards for subdivision proposals are as follows: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 5, § D) 
Sec. 46-70. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-32, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 10-25-90, art. 5, § E; Ord. of 5-3-16(1)) 
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The ordinance passed on December 14, 1988, by the Carroll County board of health entitled "Carroll County Rules and Regulations for On-site Sewage Management Systems" is on file for review in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; natural resources, ch. 62; offenses, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOBACCO SMOKING 

Sec. 50-26. - Designation of smoking and nonsmoking areas; signs. 
All county-owned, county-operated, or county-leased office space, buildings and facilities in the county shall be designated either "smoking" or "nonsmoking" in accordance with the provisions in this section: 
(1)  The county board of commissioners or its designee shall place signs in all open office areas, employee work areas, restrooms, reception areas, lobbies, conference rooms, elevators, stairwells, and any indoor area accessible to the general public designating whether smoking is or is not permitted. 
(2)  Any area outlined in subsection (1) of this section not explicitly designated and signed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be a nonsmoking area. 
(3)  All outdoor areas shall be designated smoking areas unless safety regulations require otherwise. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article to smoke in any area designated a "nonsmoking area" under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-90, § I) 
Sec. 50-27. - Citations for failure to comply; penalty for violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in violation of this article. The county board of commissioners or its designee has the power to issue citations for failure to comply with this article. Jurisdiction shall lie in the county magistrate's court. Violators of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 3-8-90, § II) 
Chapter 54 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day; police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Criminal history background checks. 
(a)  The county sheriff's department is hereby authorized and empowered to charge and collect a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each criminal history background check it conducts on behalf of a handgun seller concerning the criminal history of a proposed handgun purchaser. 
(b)  Each seller of a handgun in the county who, in accordance with the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, requests a criminal background check from the county sheriff's department is required to forward payment in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to the county sheriff's department with each submitted original copy of "Statement of Intent to Obtain a Handgun." No criminal background check requested pursuant to the Brady Bill shall be prepared without payment of the fee set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The county sheriff's department may not at any time or under any circumstances accept a request for a criminal background check over the telephone. 
Secs. 54-2—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE AND ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 54-31. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the position of code and ordinance enforcement officer for the county. 
Sec. 54-32. - Duties, responsibilities and powers. 
(a)  The duties and responsibilities of the code and ordinance enforcement officer shall be to enforce any and all codes and ordinances enacted by the county board of commissioners, to issue citations for violations of any codes or ordinances and to prosecute such violations with or without a prosecuting attorney. In all instances where such officer desires the assistance of a prosecuting attorney, the county attorney shall serve in that capacity. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the county code and ordinance enforcement officer shall have no arrest powers. If arrest becomes necessary, such officer shall immediately turn the matter over to the county sheriff's department. 
(b)  Each citation issued by the county code and ordinance enforcement officer shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service and shall be signed by the county code and ordinance enforcement officer or an agent thereof. The prosecution for violations of county codes and ordinances upon the citation issued by the enforcement officer shall be commenced by the completion, signing and service of a citation by the county code and enforcement officer. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused if the accused resides in the county, and by registered mail if the accused resides outside of the county. A copy shall promptly be filed with the magistrate court, who shall try all violations. 
(c)  Any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the magistrate and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(d)  Execution may issue immediately upon any fine imposed by the magistrate court and not immediately paid. The county sheriff shall receive and house all persons sentenced to confinement for contempt or arrested or sentenced to confinement for violation of county codes or ordinances. 
(e)  Review of convictions shall be by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 5-11-94, §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 58 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 46; subdivisions, ch. 86; taxation, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 102. 

Sec. 58-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The ordinance entitled "Reporting Requirements for Manufactured Home Park Owners," dated April 12, 1990, and the ordinance entitled "Resolution in Reference to Mobile Homes, Carroll County, Georgia," dated March 26, 1982, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Chapter 60 - MASS GATHERINGS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 60-1. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Manager means the director of community development for the county, or the manager's designee for the administration of this chapter. 
Mass gathering means any event likely to attract 250 or more persons. 
Permit means written authorization to a person by the county to operate a mass gathering. 
Producer means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for organizing, planning, producing, advertising, or conducting a mass gathering. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-2. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club, or other entity to conduct, cause to be conducted, or assist in conducting any mass gathering without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-3. - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to any mass gathering which is to be held in any regularly established permanent place of worship, athletic field, auditorium, coliseum or other similar permanently established building within the maximum seating capacity. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-4. - Violations. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in section 1-13. In addition to the penalties set forth therein, any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-5. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the county code and ordinance enforcement officer or the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Secs. 60-6—60-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 60-11. - Application. 
(a)  A producer of a mass gathering shall apply for a permit for a mass gathering at the office of the manager on a form prescribed by the manager. Mass gathering permit application forms may be obtained from the office of the manager. 
(b)  The producer of a mass gathering, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a mass gathering permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(c)  An initial application for a mass gathering permit must be filed at least ten days before the first day of advertising the mass gathering and at least 45 days before the first day of the mass gathering. However, no initial application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the mass gathering. At the sole discretion of the manager, the producer may be authorized to submit written amendments to the producer's initial application due to unique or changing circumstances related to the event. Amendments to the initial application must be submitted to the manager. Information requested by a designated reviewing authority that clarifies information already provided in the permit application may be submitted directly to the requesting entity. 
(d)  Upon a written request and submittal of the appropriate documentation, the manager may waive or reduce the initial application fee for fundraising for charitable or other events if the manager determines that such fee is overly burdensome to the requestor or does not promote the county's general welfare. 
(e)  The county is not required to act upon an incomplete permit application. A permit application will not be approved or denied, and there will be no administrative recourse rights to a denial hearing if an applicant has not provided the required information as set forth in the mass gathering permit application established from time to time by the manager. 
(f)  Applicants are responsible for obtaining all permits, authorization and/or exemptions required by other agencies or departments with the jurisdiction for any element of the event, such as for emergency medical services plans, emergency planning and preparedness plans, tent permits, pyrotechnics permits, food service permits, etc., as well as with other sections of this Code, including, but not limited to those regulating alcoholic beverages; business licenses; fire safety; zoning; and signs. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-12. - Fee. 
An initial application for a mass gathering permit shall be submitted with a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-13. - Plans and statements to be filed. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must provide: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address; 
(2)  Any promoter's name and address; 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the property on which the mass gathering will be held; 
(4)  A copy of the agreement between the promoter and the property owner; 
(5)  The location and a description of the property on which the mass gathering will be held; 
(6)  The dates and times that the mass gathering will be held; 
(7)  The name and address of each performer who has agreed to appear at the mass gathering and the name and address of each performer's agent; 
(8)  A description of each step the promoter has taken to ensure that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained during the mass gathering; 
(9)  A description of all preparations being made to provide traffic control, to ensure that the mass gathering will be conducted in an orderly manner, and to protect the physical safety of the persons who attend the mass gathering; 
(10)  A description of the preparations made to provide adequate medical and nursing care; 
(11)  A description of the preparations made to supervise minors who may attend the mass gatherings; 
(12)  The maximum number of persons the promoter will allow to attend the mass gathering and provide a plan for limiting attendance, including methods of entering the area, number and location of ticket booths and entrances, and provisions for keeping nonticket holders out of the area; 
(13)  A statement verifying that all construction and installation of facilities as required will be completed at least 24 hours prior to the commencement of the event; and 
(14)  A statement from local fire and law enforcement authorities having jurisdiction over the area acknowledging that the authorities can supply adequate security, traffic control and law enforcement for the proposed gathering. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-14. - Application review and conditions. 
The manager may submit the application to other departments of the county who may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit, and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provision of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-15. - Permit restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for police and sanitation service. A mass gathering shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a mass gathering shall be responsible for the provision of law enforcement, fire, and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. 
(b)  Time limitation. Except for clearing of the area, no mass gathering shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(c)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation. The outermost boundaries of the mass gathering shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ [inches] × 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets, roads, and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. 
(d)  Maps for walks or runs. The producer of a mass gathering such as a walk or run as to which the provisions of subsection (c) would not be practicable shall submit a map with the application for a permit, which shall be no smaller than 8½ [inches] × 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-16. - Bond. 
The person holding or promoting a mass gathering shall provide a bond of $5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. The bond shall be to guarantee full compliance with this chapter as well as other applicable provisions of the state health code and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. The bond shall also cover cleanup of the site. This bond shall be in favor of the county for the benefit of any person who is damaged as a result of the activity of a mass gathering. Any person claiming against the bond may maintain an action at law against the producer or the person holding or promoting the mass gathering and the surety. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-17. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for a permit to conduct a mass gathering shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be stated on each approved application. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than five business days prior to the date of the mass gathering. 
(c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(d)  No producer of any mass gathering, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-18. - Final approval of permit; minimum review period. 
(a)  The manager is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a mass gathering after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies, as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. 
(b)  A minimum of 20 business days will be allowed for the administrative review of an application. 
(c)  The government shall approve, tentatively approve, or deny the permit no later than 30 business days following the date the fully-completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-19. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Reasons for the denial of a mass gathering permit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the county; 
(2)  The application contains incomplete or false information; 
(3)  The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this section, including the failure to remit all fees and deposits, or the failure to provide proof of insurance, bonds, and a save-harmless agreement to the county; 
(4)  The event will last longer than three days; 
(5)  The location selected for the mass gathering is inadequate for the purpose for which it will be used; 
(6)  The promoter has not made adequate preparations to limit the number of persons attending the mass gathering or to provide adequate supervision for minors attending the mass gathering; 
(7)  The preparations for the mass gathering do not ensure that minimum standards of sanitation and health will be maintained; 
(8)  The preparations for the mass gathering do not ensure that the mass gathering will be conducted in an orderly manner and that the physical safety of persons attending will be protected; 
(9)  Adequate arrangements for traffic control have not been provided; or 
(10)  Adequate medical and nursing care will not be available; and 
(11)  Access and parking would be insufficient for the attendants and/or public safety responders such as fire, law enforcement, and ambulances. 
(b)  Reasons for the revocation of a mass gathering permit include: 
(1)  The application contained incomplete or false information; 
(2)  The producer fails to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit, this Code, state law, or other applicable rule or regulation; 
(3)  The applicant fails to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance, or bonds to the county; and 
(4)  A disaster, public calamity, change in applicable law, riot, or other emergency exists. 
All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be temporary and do not vest any permanent rights. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-20. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the manager shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a mass gathering permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. Ignorance of the permit requirement shall not be influential in determining extraordinary circumstances. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 60-21. - Appeal of denial. 
Any applicant denied registration may appeal the denial through direct appeal to the county board of commissioners by submitting a notice of appeal to the manager within 15 days of the date of the denial. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Chapter 62 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 62-26. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The ordinances providing for the establishment of the Sharpe Creek watershed protection district and the Snake Creek watershed protection district are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 62-27—62-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PHOSPHATE-FREE DETERGENTS 

Sec. 62-46. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight. The board of commissioners finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorous in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. of 8-10-89, § 1) 
Sec. 62-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
Phosphorous means elemental phosphorous. 
(Ord. of 8-10-89, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-48. - Retail sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-10-89, § 3) 
Sec. 62-49. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-13. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-10-89, § 4) 
Sec. 62-50. - Additional action for violation of article. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 62-49, the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-10-89, § 5) 
Chapter 66 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; law enforcement, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Tobacco-free policy. 
The county adopts a tobacco free policy for the Carroll County Recreation Complex. 
(Min. of 6-19-07) 
Secs. 66-2—66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 66-26. - Disorderly conduct. 
Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the unincorporated area of the county shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or the property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(8)  Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, or attempt to do so. 
(9)  Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(Ord. of 2-2-88, § 1) 
Sec. 66-27. - Penalty for violation of section 66-26. 
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this article or doing any act prohibited by this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 2-2-88, § 2) 
Secs. 66-28—66-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— A motion of July 24, 2007 amended the Code by repealing former § 66-28 in its entirety. Former § 66-28 pertained to discharge of deadly weapons, and derived from an ordinance of June 19, 2007. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Sec. 66-51. - Utilities apparatus; public or private. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality, or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold, or distributed by the company, municipality, or political subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 1) 
Sec. 66-52. - Responsibility for acts of tampering or diversion. 
Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in section 66-51 and the person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 2) 
Sec. 66-53. - Jurisdiction of legal cases arising under article. 
Jurisdiction for all cases arising under this article shall be in the county magistrate's court. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 3) 
Sec. 66-54. - Enforcement authority. 
The county sheriff's department, the county code and ordinance enforcement office, and the county health department shall have enforcement authority for all violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 4) 
Sec. 66-55. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Violators of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 5) 
Sec. 66-56. - Discretionary prosecution for violation of article. 
This article shall be cumulative with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. The officials charged with enforcement of this article shall have the discretion to prosecute violations of the provisions of this article either under this article or under state law. 
(Ord. of 4-11-91, § 6) 
Secs. 66-57—66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 66-61. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the county of any and all littering on public or private property; 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the county and prevent harm to the public health, safety, and general welfare, including the potential degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the county. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other article, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Res./Ord. of 2-7-06, § 1) 
Sec. 66-62. - Definitions. 
Litter means any waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and containers, glass containers, broken glass, dead animals, or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; and any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; waterways and drainage systems, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands, or forests, and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Res./Ord. of 2-7-06, § 1) 
Sec. 66-63. - Prohibition against littering public or private property. 
(a)  Public or private property. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, or, leave, or to cause or permit the throwing, dumping, sweeping, pushing, blowing, depositing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless: 
a.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
b.  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
c.  The person: 
1.  Is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, 
2.  Has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or 
3.  The act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant. 
(2)  No person shall conduct any activity or acts set forth in subsection (a)(1)a., b., or c. unless all activity or acts are done in a manner consistent with the public welfare and do not constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Waterways and stormwater drainage systems. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, leave, or to cause or permit the throwing, dumping, sweeping, pushing, blowing, depositing, or leaving of litter in any public or private gutter, street, right of way, waterway, or storm water collection system within the county; and 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump raw human waste or waste water of any sort, used motor oil, and any other liquid into any public right of way, waterway, or storm water collection system within the county. This includes dumping from any train, aircraft, motor vehicle, or vessel, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Res./Ord. of 2-7-06, § 1) 
Sec. 66-64. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance with a load, on or in such conveyance, unless the load, on or in such conveyance, is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of such load onto the ground, roadway, public or private property. 
(Res./Ord. of 2-7-06, § 1) 
Sec. 66-65. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1), whenever any litter that is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For violations not occurring on a waterway or storm drainage system, by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00. For violations occurring on a waterway or storm drainage system, by a fine of not less than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c)(1) above, the violator shall reimburse the county for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when such litter is, or is ordered, removed by the county; and 
Court-mandated litter cleanup: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right of way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
c.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, and code enforcement officers and county officials are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Res./Ord. of 2-7-06, § 1; Ord. No. 66-65, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-09) 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 66-66. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county through the control of noise. It is the intent of this article to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-67. - Restrictions. 
(a)  The making, creating, or permitting of any such noise, sound, or vibration of such intensity, duration, frequency, or character that would be harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare, or safety of the inhabitants of the county is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, or continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any landowners in the area, dwellings, businesses, or public areas, including, but not limited to, public streets or roads, sidewalks, or parks, which cause significant discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing or operating a business in the area. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-68. - Standards for evaluation of noise violation. 
The standards which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this article exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The level of the noise; 
(2)  The nature of the noise and whether it is usual or unusual; 
(3)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(4)  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(5)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities, hospitals, churches, and facilities for the care of the elderly, ill, or mentally ill, as well as any other area which historically is treated by the community as a quiet area; 
(6)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
(8)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; and 
(9)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-69. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle or equipment of the county, school district, or any other governmental agency while engaged upon public business; 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; 
(3)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways, by or on behalf of the county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the provisions of this article apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; 
(4)  Excavations or repairs of any portion of the water and sewer systems, by or on behalf of the county or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day or when there is urgent necessity therefor; 
(5)  Work being completed upon any facility or property owned or operated by the county, city, or school district, including, but not limited to, all construction activity and maintenance work; 
(6)  Noises from safety signals or government-owned and operated public warning devices; 
(7)  Agriculture activities, farming, or other agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7; 
(8)  Noises or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing entities in the normal course of their business; 
(9)  Any parade, celebration, performance, program, sporting event, activity or other event duly authorized by a county, city, or school district; 
(10)  Aircraft-related noises associated with aircraft at an airport, while in flight or while under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-70. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the county code and ordinance enforcement officer or the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-71. - Violation; penalties. 
Violators of this article shall be punished by fine as follows: 
(1)  First violation resulting in a conviction or guilty plea or nolo contendere plea: $300.00 fine; 
(2)  Second violation resulting in a conviction or guilty plea or nolo contendere plea: $500.00 fine; 
(3)  Third and all subsequent violation(s) resulting in a conviction or guilty plea or nolo contendere plea: $1,000.00 fine. 
Additionally, after the third violation resulting in a conviction or guilty plea or nolo contendere plea, violators may be incarcerated for not more than 60 days per violation. Community service may be included in addition to any penalty provided for hereunder, but not in lieu of the fine schedule set forth herein. Any violator shall be responsible for all court costs as determined by the court. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-72. - Severability clause. 
A determination of the invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, or part of this section shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Secs. 66-73—66-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NUISANCE 

Sec. 66-80. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed below: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another; provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-81. - Enumeration. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and this section shall not be construed to limit the broad definitions of nuisance found in this article, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing, throwing, or discharging from any house or premises, and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind into any road, street or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(2)  Stagnant water. Standing and stagnant water on premises that can become a breeding ground for mosquitoes or that promotes the growth of mosquito larvae. 
(3)  Statutory nuisances: Any other condition constituting a nuisance under other sections of this Code, or state law, including state minimum standard codes, building, fire, life and safety codes. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-82. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, business, owner, lessee, tenant, or other, having possession, ownership or control of private property to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation of a nuisance on any property within the county. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-83. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by the building inspector, county code and ordinance enforcement officer, or the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-84. - Issuance of summons for abatement and hearing. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the county, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the county that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under this article or any other county ordinance, the sheriff, the building inspector, or county code and ordinance enforcement officer, or their designees may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for the condition. The summons shall describe the condition complained of and specify the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby. The summons shall require such person to appear before the magistrate judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-85. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the court at the hearing provided for by this article shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding. The order may provide any or all of the following: 
(1)  That the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. 
(2)  How the condition is to be abated, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. 
(3)  That if the property owner or other person responsible therefor shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the county shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition. 
(4)  Fine or imprisonment within the parameters of this article or under this Code. 
(b)  The expense thereof, including court costs and attorney fees, shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for county taxes. Execution shall issue for such costs as for county taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as for county taxes. 
(c)  Should the judge find that it is in the best interest of justice, he may order the county to proceed with a nuisance abatement action under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-86. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth herein. Notice shall be given to the person, owner or manager responsible for the property of a hearing to be held at the next scheduled court date of the magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-87. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the county to proceed with abatement under this article, and the owner of the property or other person responsible therefor resides outside the county limits or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by this article shall be made by: 
(1)  Mailing a copy of the notice to any known address, by certified or registered mail or by statutory overnight mail; 
(2)  Posting a copy of the notice on the property involved; and 
(3)  Publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the county once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. When personal service cannot be made upon such person within the county limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-88. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the court to punish for any other violations, which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Sec. 66-89. - Exemptions. 
As provided for in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7, no agricultural facility, agricultural operation, any agricultural operation at an agricultural facility, agricultural support facility, or any operation at an agricultural support facility shall be or shall become a nuisance, either public or private, as a result of changed conditions in or around the locality of such facility or operation if the facility or operation has been in operation for one year or more. The provisions of this section shall not apply when a nuisance results from the negligent, improper, or illegal operation of any such facility or operation. 
(Ord. of 1-3-17(1)) 
Chapter 70 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county's civil service rules and regulations, fire rescue administrative policy, employees retirement plan, and drug and alcohol policy are compiled and published separately by the county. Official copies of such regulations and documents are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Related laws reference— Civil service system, art. III. 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11-1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; civil service system for county employees authorized, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec 2, par. 1; O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21; fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; random drug testing of employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; public employee hazardous chemical protection and right to know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; drug-free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The ordinance excluding from social security coverage employees earning less than $100.00 in a calendar year for services provided as election officials and poll workers is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 70-2—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Certain officials covered; generally. 
Certain elected officials of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties, the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, magistrate judge, tax commissioner and coroner shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws. Additionally, elected members of the governing authority of the county shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. 
(Res. of 10-4-05) 
Sec. 70-32. - Volunteer firefighters covered while on duty. 
Volunteer firefighters of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties, they shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. Such coverage shall only extend to volunteer firefighting services rendered to the county. 
Sec. 70-33. - Law enforcement personnel covered on duty. 
Volunteer county law enforcement personnel who are certified by the state peace officers standards and training council shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties, they shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. 
Sec. 70-34. - Volunteer rescue workers covered on duty. 
Volunteer members or workers of an emergency management or civil defense organization, emergency medical service or rescue organization of the county, and volunteer first responders shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties, they shall be covered under the state workers' compensation laws. Such coverage shall extend only to such volunteer services as are rendered and which are not prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-36. 
(Res. of 10-4-05) 
Chapter 74 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; signs, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 86; roads and streets in subdivisions, §§ 86-122, 86-123; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; authorization by any county or municipality for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Load and wheel limits on county roads and bridges; covered loads; exception. 
(a)  The load limit on all county roads shall be set in accordance with state law, rules and regulations unless otherwise posted at a lower limit by the county. 
(b)  Weight limits on county bridges shall be set in accordance with state and federal posting and closing regulations. 
(c)  No vehicle with more than six wheels shall utilize any county road for travel and/or access through the county. However, vehicles exceeding the restricted limit shall be permitted to travel on county roads only for the purpose of delivering or receiving goods and services to a specific destination along county roads or to the driver's place of residence. If travel along county roads is necessary for the above permissible purpose, then vehicles must use the nearest state highway intersection for entering and exiting county roads. 
(d)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-4-41, it shall be unlawful for any person to haul, drive or bring on any bridge any vehicle, load or weight which in any manner exceeds the maximum limits ascertained and posted on such bridge. Any person hauling, driving, or otherwise bringing on such bridge any such load or weight exceeding the maximum limits so ascertained and posted shall be in violation of this article. 
(e)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248.1, no vehicle shall be driven or moved on any county road unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded or covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping, or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard. No person shall operate or load for operation on any county road any vehicle with any load unless such load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner becoming a hazard to other users of the county road. 
(Ord. of 10-2-18(2), §1(exh. A)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 2, 2018, amended § 74-1 to read as set out herein. Previously § 74-1 was titled "Load limit on county roads and bridges; covered loads; exception". 
Sec. 74-2. - Unauthorized parking of vehicles. 
No person shall park or cause to be parked on any county road or any property maintained by the county any vehicle overnight or for any other period; provided, however, that disabled vehicles may remain on such property in an area safely out of the flow of traffic for a reasonable period not to exceed 24 hours, which time limit may be waived by the office of the enforcement officer in his or her reasonable discretion; provided further, however, that a vehicle may be parked on such property safely out of the flow of traffic for a reasonable time as is required to first clear a location on the site and off of the county road, for parking; however, unless specifically authorized by the enforcement officer, in no case shall such vehicle be permitted to remain on such property for a period exceeding eight hours; any such vehicle violating any provision of this subsection may be impounded by the enforcement officer, who may issue a citation to the owner or operator of such vehicle. Neither the county nor any of its employees or agents shall be responsible for any charges incurred or damages sustained in the towing and storage of such vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-2-18(2), §1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-3. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation may be treated as a separate offense. 
(c)  The enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 10-2-18(2), §1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 74-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County road means all roads which are part of the county public road system, as delineated in accordance with the roads mapping system of the county, as amended. 
Enforcement officer means the county sheriff, any law enforcement official (including without limitation Georgia State Patrol), the county code and ordinance enforcement officer, or their deputies or designees. 
Any terms not specifically defined in this section shall have the same definition, if any, provided under O.C.G.A. § 32-6-26. 
(Ord. of 10-2-18(2), §1(exh. A)) 
Secs. 74-5—74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-26. - Intent, responsibility and authority of county. 
(a)  It is the intention of the county to provide the citizens of the county an all-weather system of roads. The county will be responsible for the planning and programming of improvements and maintenance of roads and bridges to uniform standards. The county will cooperate and coordinate with the state department of transportation and other agencies in the planning, design, and construction of local roads. The county will purchase and maintain adequate equipment to perform necessary maintenance and construction. 
(b)  It shall be the county's responsibility to maintain and upgrade existing urban and rural county roads, approve and initiate new construction on county roads and establish and exercise authority concerning county roads. 
(c)  No maintenance, construction, or alterations shall be performed on county-maintained roadways, regardless of the condition of such roadways without proper permission and authorization by the county officials. Projects involving state or federal aid, joint projects with other municipalities, other county agencies and utility construction on rights-of-way will be coordinated and inspected by the county. 
(d)  The county shall have the authority to require access roads and commercial and private driveways to meet construction standards set forth by the county. 
(e)  The county shall have the exclusive authority concerning scheduling and prioritization of maintenance and new construction on county roads. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-27. - Surface materials. 
Materials and application of materials will be in accordance with typical cross section provided and will conform to hot mix asphaltic concrete construction provisions as set forth in the state department of transportation specification manual. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-28. - Drainage. 
(a)  Ditches. Ditches shall be excavated at a gradient so that water velocity causes neither silting nor erosion. Minimum gradient for earth and grass-lined channels will be 0.5 percent. The work shall be coordinated with other work on the project and will be maintained in satisfactory condition by the developer until the project is accepted by the county. 
(b)  Culverts and cross drains. A developer shall provide legally executed easements for cross drains and culverts diverting water onto areas other than dedicated rights-of-way. A developer shall be required to control concentration and flow of water according to state specifications. A culvert entrance and outlet shall properly take care of water, bed-loading and floating debris at all stages of flow. It should be designed to function properly after the fill has caused settlement, and accommodate increased runoff due to anticipated land development. Construction of drainpipes and culverts shall be performed in accordance with specifications and standards maintained in the office of the roads superintendent of the county. Fill material will be placed alternately in layers no thicker than six inches. Backfill will be mechanically or hand tamped to a minimum of 100 percent. 
(c)  Street water removal. Street water removal shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 
(1)  Five hundred feet on grades up to seven percent. 
(2)  Four hundred feet on grades from seven percent to ten percent. 
(3)  Two hundred fifty feet on grades over ten percent. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-29. - Inspection. 
All materials and each part or detail of work shall be subject to inspection by the county road superintendent or authorized representative. Such representative will be furnished with such information and assistance by the developer, as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection. The developer shall notify the road superintendent of the progressive stages of construction in order to allow inspection of subbase, base, and cross drains prior to covering with stone, surface materials or backfill. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-30. - Maximum degree of curve and minimum radius. 
The super elevation minimum radius and maximum degree of curve shall be suitable to the designed speed of each constructed roadway. Design speed of roadways within subdivisions shall not exceed 35 miles per hour. Designed speed of county-constructed and -maintained roadways will not exceed 55 miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-31. - Crown. 
A road shall be crowned at a rate of one-quarter of an inch per foot. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-32. - Culs-de-sac. 
All dead-end roads shall be provided with a cul-de-sac or turnaround at the closed end. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-33. - Right-of-way. 
A minimum of a 60-foot dedicated right-of-way will be required. A 50-foot right-of-way shall be permitted if curbed and guttered. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-34. - Erosion control. 
Erosion control shall be in accordance with the county soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements. 
Cross reference— Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control, ch. 38, art. II. 
Sec. 74-35. - Surface. 
Road surface shall consist of two inches minimum compacted asphaltic concrete "E" or "F" mix on a six-inch minimum graded aggregate compacted base. Surface treatments shall be permitted on roads or ditches with grades that do not allow the normal operation of paving equipment. Surface treatment, when used, shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  Triple surface treatment. Triple surface treatment shall include the following: 

 
(2)  Item 1. Moisture aggregates shall contain no free moisture when spread. 
(3)  Item 2, Spreading. The aggregate shall be uniformly spread at the specified rate without corrugations, overlaps, excess or deficient areas. The application of the aggregate shall immediately follow the bituminous application. The spreader shall move at a uniform rate of speed regardless of grade. The distance that the aggregate falls shall remain constant during spreading. Corrugations shall be removed. The spreader shall be operated to prevent overlap of aggregate. Hand spotting and brooming shall be employed as necessary to ensure a uniform aggregate spread. 
(4)  Item 3, Rolling. A rolling pattern and speed shall be sufficient to thoroughly key the aggregate into the bituminous material. Where the use of a steel roller causes aggregate fracture, pneumatic tired rollers only will be used. 
(5)  Item 4. No traffic shall be permitted on any individual course until the bituminous material has cooled or set enough that the aggregate will not be loosened or dislodged. 
Sec. 74-36. - Driveway installation. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of individuals desiring access to county-maintained roads to build and install their own driveways. Driveway culverts will be required by the county. Culverts will be a minimum of 15-inch diameters and a minimum of 20-foot lengths. Driveway culverts will be installed to provide good drainage, and no obstructions to existing drainage will be allowed. Driveway culverts shall be installed on a slight gradient to allow drainage from the higher elevation end of the pipe to the lower elevation end of the pipe. The gradient will be determined by individual sight locations. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the driveway to notify the county representatives prior to the installation of each driveway pipe location. Assistance in determining a desirable driveway location pipe size and installation instructions will be available from county representatives on request. Installation of the pipe and driveway can be performed by the county upon request of the landowner at a cost not less than the total cost of materials. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-37. - Driveway location. 
Driveways will be located so that the angle of intersection and slope of driveway provides a clear line of sight to users of the driveway and traffic on an existing county roadway. The slope of the driveway shall not be such that dirt and debris wash down the driveway into the road. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Sec. 74-38. - Typical section. 
The included typical section demonstrates the desired finished grade, slopes, backslopes, crown of road, aggregate base, required amount and type of asphalt, shoulders, and width of roadway. This does not illustrate super elevation which will be determined on site or on proposed plat. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Editor's note— An official copy of the "included typical section" referred to in this section is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 74-39. - Penalty for violation of article; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provision, requirement, term or condition of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  If a violation of this article exists or is proposed, the county attorney or any owner of real estate within the county and adjoining the property may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such violation. 
(Ord. of 1-7-86) 
Secs. 74-40—74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD DAMAGE 

Sec. 74-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means any and all injury to the road surface or right-of-way of a road which is part of the county public road system. Acts of injury shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Diversion of or the filling in of any drainage ditch, culvert or pipe parallel to or underneath a public road, so as to restrain or redirect the flow of water. 
(2)  The operation of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment which will gouge, rip, break, depress or otherwise deface a public road. 
(3)  The continued ingress or egress, to and from a public road at a particular location which results in a buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals or other materials, which present potential hazard to other persons using the public road. 
(4)  The creation or erection of any dam, berm, ditch or wall which restrains the natural flow of waters and results in the redirecting of waters onto the road surface or right-of-way of any public road within the county. 
Enforcement officer means the county sheriff, the county road superintendent, the county code and ordinance enforcement officer, or their deputies or designees. 
Governing body means the county board of commissioners. 
Public road means any and all roads which are a part of the county public road system, as delineated in accordance with the roads mapping system of the county, as amended. 
Repair means the repair of a public road to its condition prior to the occurrence of damage caused. 
(Ord. of 11-13-93, § II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-62. - Violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage any public road in the county. Each day of a continuing violation may be treated as a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-13-93, § III) 
Sec. 74-63. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article; jury trial. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the county enforcement officer. Citations for violations may be issued by the enforcement officer requiring an individual defendant to appear before the county magistrate's court. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the county magistrate's court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished according to the provisions of section 1-13. Additionally, upon conviction, the magistrate shall have the authority to require restitution to repair the damage to the county public roads or to require the defendant to do community service work to repair the damage to the public road. 
(c)  There shall be no jury trials in the magistrate court. Demand for jury trial in the county state court must be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-61. 
(Ord. of 11-13-93, § IV) 
Sec. 74-64. - Ordinances in conflict. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. It is the specific intention of this article that it be read in conformity with any and all state laws regulating damage to government property. 
(Ord. of 11-13-93, § V) 
Secs. 74-65—74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC ROADS POLICY 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-81. - Acceptance of official county road map and roads registry. 
The official county road map and county roads registry, as now or hereafter amended, as kept in the office of the county clerk and in the office of the roads superintendent, is hereby accepted. All roads presently listed on the county roads registry shall be considered county public roads. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-82. - Off system roads, guidelines for acceptance. 
Subject only to the provisions set out in section 74-83 herein for previously maintained roads, prior to any off system road being accepted by the county for ownership and maintenance, the following criteria must be met: 
(1)  A sixty-foot right-of-way shall be required for acceptance. 
(2)  The sixty-foot right-of-way must be deeded to the county by the property owner(s) involved, with releases obtained from any mortgage holders having an interest in the proposed right-of-way. 
(3)  Clear title and right-of-way must be furnished, with all research and cost the responsibility of the property owners. 
(4)  All cost(s), including, but not limited to, right-of-way, surveys, engineering and attorney's fees shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s). 
(5)  The road in question must have been in existence for at least seven years, with sufficient documentation presented to the chairman of the board of commissioners to substantiate the seven-year requirement. 
(6)  A minimum of two separate residents must live on the road in question, with all families in agreement to donate the road and right-of-way to the county. 
(7)  The commission may require any dead-end road to provide a cul-de-sac with not less than a 50-foot radius from the center. 
(8)  The road must have a minimum graded width of 30 feet; this would allow for 20-foot paving with five foot shoulders should the county decide to upgrade this road in the future. 
(9)  The board of commissioners, though a variance procedure, can look at other criteria provided by the parties involved. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-83. - Road criteria, previously maintained roads. 
The purpose of these criteria is to provide a means for accepting and maintaining roads that at one time were maintained by the county, which may or may not have deeded rights-of-way, but, for whatever reason, the road was left off or either deleted from the Official Carroll County Road Registry of 1985, but which continue to serve as a means for residents to access their homes. This would not include roads which have been officially abandoned by the county. 
(1)  Except in the instance of the addition of a cut-through road or bypass road that is requested by the roads superintendent as needed to improve the safe, economical or efficient flow of traffic within the county by the general public, a resident who is living on the road must request the county to maintain the road before it will be considered for addition to the roads registry. The resident must be living on the road as of the date of this article as set out below. 
(2)  To be considered for placement on the county roads registry as an official county public road, it must be established to the satisfaction of the chairman of the board of commissioners that: 
a.  The road was considered a county road at some time in the past; 
b.  Said road was, at sometime in the past, worked by the county as a public road for a period in excess of seven years; 
c.  The present roadbed is the same or essentially the same as that previously worked by the county; and, 
d.  The road will service the properties of more than one individual or that the road is needed for efficient, safe and convenient flow of traffic for the general public as a cut-through or bypass road between two roads presently on the county roads registry. 
(3)  In order to satisfy the requirements set out in section (b) above, the chairman may consider and accept as evidence of prior use as a county road such information as old county or state road maps; recitation in ancient instruments or deeds; aerial photos; old surveys performed by official registered land surveyors; affidavits of individuals having particular knowledge of the area and the old roadbed and the working of the same; affidavits of former roads employees of the county as to the prior working of the road; the shape and contour of the roadbed itself, the depth of cuts, banks and ditches on the road; whether the road is presently or at some time in the past has been used for school bus traffic or as a rural mail delivery route; utility service on the road, etc. 
(4)  If the chairman believes that the old roadbed meets the requirements for addition to the roads registry, he or she shall: 
a.  Contact the commissioner(s) within whose district the road is located to determine if that commissioner is aware of the requested addition of the road to the registry, and 
b.  Request the roads superintendent to examine the road and define the beginning point and ending point, length of the road and point at which private driveways may intersect the road. 
(5)  The chairman shall thereafter submit the road to the board of commissioners, at a regularly called meeting, for a vote on whether the road will be added to the official roads registry. At this meeting, it will be expected that the roads superintendent or his designee shall make a recommendation for or against official acceptance of the road. The road will be accepted only upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the commissioners, and the vote shall be placed on the minutes of the meeting. If accepted, the road shall be officially named and shall be submitted to the roads superintendent for addition to the official roads registry and reported to the state for addition to the county roads map as published by the state. The road shall not be graded, scraped or otherwise "worked" until after its acceptance by the board as reflected in the official county minutes. 
(6)  Any other acceptance factors not covered in the criteria set out in section (3) shall be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  The right-of-way shall be the same as that required for a Class V road set out in section 12-29(d) below. 
(8)  Any dead-end road shall require a minimum 50-foot cul-de-sac. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-84. - Road and street classifications and limitation of maintenance. 
(a)  All roads and streets on the county road system and on county maintenance, as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall have been classified as one of the five classifications of roads and streets established herein. All roads and streets accepted in the future on the county road system shall be designated as either a class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V road or street and the maintenance to be provided by the county shall be defined and limited by this section according to the classification of each road and street. 
(b)  The minimum acceptable design standards for roads and streets shall be determined by the board of commissioners, with the assistance of the superintendent of roads and filed in the office of the county clerk and the office of the roads superintendent. The procedures for property owners or residents of the county to petition to request the county to accept a road or street on the county road system shall also be determined by the board of commissioners and shall be filed in the office of the county clerk and the office of the roads superintendent. 
(c)  Because of the duty of fiscal responsibility and management imposed by law upon the board of commissioners, nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to require the board of commissioners to accept any road or street for class III, or class IV on the county road system for maintenance even after compliance by the owners or residents of the county with the established procedures. 
(d)  The road and street classifications are as follows: 
Class I: Roads in the county, designated as either federal or state roads. The rights-of-way to these roads are, or will be, owned by the state or the United States of America or the respective departments or agencies thereof. The county's responsibility for the care or maintenance of these roads will be limited to the general responsibility imposed on any state county to provide assistance to the state or nation as required by controlling state or federal laws or regulations. 
Class II: Roads having vehicular traffic in excess of 300 vehicles per day. Class II roads will include all major county thoroughfares meeting the following specifications: 
1.  An average minimum right-of-way of 60 feet or 80 feet, if a state-aid road; 
2.  Twenty to 24 feet (24 feet to 36 feet with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix surface, as may be required by the roads department; 
3.  Eight-foot shoulders; 
4.  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
5.  Grassed slopes; 
Class II roads are eligible for full maintenance by the county, as may be supplemented by state or federal funds, such as: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class III: All subdivision streets as described in the county uniform subdivision regulations. At the time of acceptance, the streets should meet the minimum standards and specifications of the subdivision regulations: 
1.  Fifty-foot right-of-way for curb and gutter streets or 60-foot right-of-way for non-curb and gutter streets; 
2.  Twenty-foot to 24-foot (24 feet to 36-feet with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix surface, as approved in writing by the roads department; 
3.  Six-foot shoulders; 
4.  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
5.  Grassed slopes; 
Class III roads are eligible for upgrading to class II at county expense as transportation needs of the county may require and full maintenance shall be at the expense of the county, to include: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class IV: One hundred to 300 vehicles per day. All minor county roads meeting the following specifications: 
1.  Sixty-foot deeded right-of-way; 
2.  Twenty-foot (24-foot with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix or surface treatment pavement; 
3.  Six-foot shoulders; 
4.  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
5.  Grassed slopes; 
Class IV Roads are eligible for upgrading to class II as transportation needs of the county may require and for full maintenance at county's expense to include the following: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class V: Less than one hundred vehicles per day; all roads meeting the following specifications: 
1.  Gravel or dirt surface with varying widths (for the purposes of the roads registry, it will be assumed that each class V road has a 40-foot right-of-way (unless a larger right-of-way has been deeded and accepted), but under no circumstances shall the right-of-way be less than the distance from the top of one bank to top of the opposite bank adjoining the roadbed); 
Class V roads shall be eligible for upgrade as the transportation needs of the county change and as the traffic flow on the roads increase. Any upgrade to a new classification will require the obtaining of a minimum of a 60-foot deeded right-of-way to the county (80-foot, if the upgrade will involve state aid). 
Class V roads shall be eligible for limited maintenance as follows: 
a.  The existing roadway surface will be leveled and graded (with gravel provided as needed) to a passable condition; 
b.  Vegetation control will be to the top of the ditch banks adjoining the roadbed only; 
c.  All existing drainage structures and ditches will be maintained and cleaned (no new or improved drainage system will be provided, unless required for safe passage of vehicular traffic or for proper drainage). 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-85. - Repairs and construction. 
The county public works department (to include roads department) shall construct and repair the streets and sidewalks of the county, or direct the same, as may be ordered by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-86. - Excavations. 
(a)  No county road shall be cut or excavated in any way except on written permission of the roads superintendent after written request has been made, accurately describing the excavation to be done and its location. 
(b)  The roads department of the county shall be notified before any excavation is begun. 
(c)  Any road excavated hereunder shall be replaced and restored to reasonably the same condition as prior to the excavation, including the regressing of the easement, if damaged thereby, within 30 days of the completion of the excavation for each area. The roads department will set guidelines for any pavement cuts and repair of the same. 
(d)  Notice of the completion of the excavation restoration work required in subsection (c) above shall be made to the public works department, and the superintendent, or a designee thereof, who shall then inspect the restoration to ensure its proper completion. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-87. - Minimum acceptable design standards. 
The minimum acceptable design standards for construction and maintenance of county roads are shown in the county subdivision regulations and the county engineer's office. These standards are reviewed at least annually to determine if any updating is necessary. The county engineer's office will be the source for the most current listing of design standards. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Secs. 74-88—74-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM 

Sec. 74-101. - Departmental responsibility. 
The office of county manager or county executive officer has been designated by ordinance as having the overall administrative responsibility for this article. It is recommended that an employee within this department coordinate all procedures outline herein. The following are recommended administrative duties [2]: 
(1)  Administer the "residential street acceptance and maintenance program" in accordance with all applicable provisions of said ordinance. Copies of the ordinance to be maintained in the officers of the county manager or executive officer and the engineering department. 
(2)  Survey existing unmaintained public streets and roads with the engineering department and the department of public works, and recommend in written report the appropriate classification which the road could be accepted for maintenance. 
(3)  Advise any prospective petitioners for maintenance of each street of the procedures required by this article. 
(4)  Provide standard petition forms for prospective petitioners. 
(5)  Check petitions submitted for accuracy and conformance with this article. 
(6)  Notify property owners fronting on the respective street of the date and time the petition is to be considered by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  Perform any other duties necessary to carry out this article, including proposed amendments to this article when desirable and necessary. 
(8)  If the petitioners wish to upgrade a road to a higher classification, determine the proportionate cost to each property owner or petitioner. 
a.  Advise petitioners of the approximate costs to the property owners requesting maintenance. 
b.  Submit recommended petitions to the board of commissioners with accurate costs to be incurred and assessed to the property owners and nay recommendations pertaining to the work to be performed. 
c.  Schedule and coordinate the construction work with the department of engineering and/or public works. 
d.  Establish and maintain a direct line of communication with the property owners when and as the work progresses in order to minimize complaints and inconveniences while work is in progress. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Provided for by existing ordinance for acceptance and maintenance of public streets, § 74-26 et seq. 

Sec. 74-102. - Procedure for obtaining street acceptance and maintenance under the street acceptance and maintenance ordinance. 
Once the program is initiated, the following is the step-by-step procedure for property owner/resident to obtain acceptance and maintenance for their respective streets: 
When the county manager or executive officer receives a request for acceptance and maintenance of a public street or road (as defined herein) he shall inform the person that this can be accomplished only on a petition basis and completion of the following steps: 
(1)  Someone, other than county personnel, must circulate a petition obtaining the signatures of all or 100 percent of the property owners, not tenant, who won all or 100 percent of the street side frontage abutting the street (road) and desiring the acceptance and maintenance. The county manager then gives (or mails) the petition form, appendix A and B to the person for circulation among the property owners. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the signed petition (by 100 percent of the abutting property owners) the county manager authenticates the signatures from the property records on file in the tax assessor's office. When this is completed, the county manager/executive officer will direct the county engineering department to survey the roadbed and prepare the necessary right-of-way is required drawings, and determine in which class the road should be accepted in. If additional right-of-way is required, the petitioners will be asked to complete appendix C, petition 2. Appendix C is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(3)  When the survey has been completed and the required right-of-way and classifications are completed the county manager/county engineer/board of commissioners will meet with the petitioners (or steering committee) and present and discuss this material with them. All aspects of the project will be discussed at this meeting, and if the minimum right-of-way can be obtained and if all petitioners agree to the classification, the county commissioners will act on the petition, at the next scheduled meeting. 
(4)  When (if) the property owners wish to upgrade the road to a higher classification the county manager will direct the petitioners to complete appendix D, petition 3. Appendix D is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. This petition must be signed by all or 100 percent of the property owners; when (if) all signatures and agreement are obtained, then a resolution providing for the construction and the payment (or assessment) of the construction cost from the abutting property owners is prepared and forwarded to the board of commissioners of the county for their approval (see appendix D). 
(5)  Construction work and pavement will be scheduled on a priority basis as a part of the overall continuous work program of the respective departments. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-103. - Assessments to property owners for improvements to upgrade road to higher classification. 
(a)  The cost of necessary work and improvements shall be entirely the responsibility of the abutting property owners who principally and collectively profit most from these improvements. Actual pavement costs only will be borne by the county government. 
(b)  The appropriate charge to abutting property owners for reimbursement of "actual costs incurred" for the improved street shall be added to their annual tax assessment by the county tax assessor. Or if preferable, a system of "lump sum" advance payment or direct billing shall be optional at the discretion of the county board of commissioners. 
(c)  Abutting property owners shall be assessed on the basis of front footage owned, as based upon property records on file with the county tax assessor. In the event of unusual factors, such as improvements needed for only a single, or a few of the abutting properties and not the whole of the abutting properties, the county manager/executive officer shall recommend to the petitioners and to the board of commissioners his judgment of an equitable assessment under the prevailing circumstances not covered in this article. 
(d)  Direct assessments for improvements (if this method of payment is used) will begin at the beginning of the next calendar quarter following completion of the street. 
(e)  The county board of commissioners will hear any request for relief in extraordinary cases and determine if those assessments should be adjusted. 
(f)  The county board of commissioners may authorize a change in assessments from time to time as necessary or desirable. 
(g)  Where commercial and/or industrial areas request acceptance and maintenance for streets or an identical status (public streets as defined herein) such streets and areas are included within the scope and jurisdiction of this article. All rules pertaining to assessment and procedures described herein shall apply to such properties. 
This general policy information will be given to those persons requesting acceptance and maintenance of streets and the petition will include proper reference to costs, etc. of the necessary construction and improvements. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Sec. 74-104. - Recommended charges for street improvements. 
The following rates are recommended as a base for assessments and should not be construed as fixed or set rates: 
Due to the nature and complexities of this type of construction; varying field conditions; varying degrees of inadequacy; varying severity of topography; varying drainage characteristics, etc. at each street to be considered, it is impossible to pre-determine fixed or base rates for all aspects of the necessary work to be accomplished. Total estimated project cost and estimated cost to each abutting property owner will be determined based on the in-the-field inspections of respective streets and current cost of the various segments of construction and related cost at the actual time of consideration by the board of commissioners. Property owners shall be assessed for "actual cost incurred" in providing all the necessary improvements, other than pavement costs. These estimated and approximate cost figures shall be expressed to the petitioners of each respective street when presented to the county board of commissioners for consideration with the acknowledgment of the petitioners. 
(Ord. of 4-11-95) 
Chapter 78 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of November 20, 2001, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 78, §§ 78-1—78-11, 78-31, 78-32, 78-56 and 78-57, and adding a new ch. 78 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 78 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance of November 1, 1988. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; roads and bridges, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; regulation of signs used by retail distilled spirits dealer; signs advertising Georgia lottery, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; regulation of outdoor advertising in vicinity of interstate highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 78-1. - Title. 
The regulations shall be known as "Regulation of On-Premise and Off-Premise Signage." 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Adoption. 
These regulations shall be in full force and effect on November 21, 2001. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(b)  To establish reasonable and impartial regulations for all signs, exterior, interior, on-premise and off-premise that afford the business community an equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without differentiation. 
(c)  To improve pedestrian and traffic safety by reducing traffic hazards caused by such unregulated signs that may distract and confuse, and impair the visibility of, motorists and pedestrians. 
(d)  To ensure the effectiveness of public traffic signs and signals. 
(e)  To protect property values by ensuring the compatibility of property with that surrounding it; and minimizing the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property. 
(f)  To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and to preserve the right of the citizens to enjoy Carroll County's scenic beauty. 
(g)  To protect the character and appearance of the various neighborhoods in the county, and attract tourists to the county. 
(h)  To protect the public investment in streets, highways and other public improvements; and protect and improve the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-4. - Authority and application. 
(a)  The regulations contained in this chapter are adopted under the authority of Article IX, Section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1983). 
(b)  Signs constitute a separate and distinct use of the land upon which they are placed and affect the use of adjacent streets, sidewalks and other public places and adjacent private places open to the public. The unregulated construction, placement and display of signs constitute a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the county. 
(c)  The rules and regulations contained in this chapter advance these significant government interests and are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve them. 
(d)  Upon the adoption of these rules and regulations, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to erect, construct, paint, alter, relocate, reconstruct, display, or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, displayed or maintained within the unincorporated area any sign, unless otherwise exempt, without first having obtained a permit from the sign administrator. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-5. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definition. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular; the word "sign" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  Certain words in these regulations are defined for the purpose herein as follows: 
Abandoned sign. A sign which no longer identifies a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, time of event passed, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. The definition shall also include any sign structure which no longer supports the sign for which it was designed. 
Advertising devices. Banners, balloons, or streamers affixed to poles, wires, or ropes, wind operated devices, flashing lights and other similar contrivances. 
Attached projecting sign. A sign attached to a building wall or structure that projects more than 12 inches horizontally from the face of the wall. 
Awning sign. A non-illuminated sign painted on or attached to a fabric or vinyl cover on a rigid frame. Only business names and/or logos may be attached to, painted, stenciled, or otherwise placed on these devices. 
Back-to-back sign. An advertising structure with two closely located signs with faces in opposing directions, spaced less than ten feet apart at the point of shortest measurement. 
Business sign. Any display, advertising device, figure, plaque, poster, out-door advertising sign or sign maintained or used to advertise or to inform or to direct the attention of the public to a business or activity conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located or to a product or service sold or rendered thereon. 
Directional sign. 
(1)  Public directional sign. A sign erected and maintained by local officials within the public right-of-way, to indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public accommodations, facilities, commercial services and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational or religious interest. 
(2)  Private directional sign. A sign authorized by the sign administrator to indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public accommodations, facilities, commercial services and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational or religious interest. 
Face. That area of a sign containing the advertising information, painting, drawing or message intended or used to advise or inform, and excluding trim and supports. 
Face of building. The total area of the main wall of a building, including windows, doors and openings, that abuts the front yard of a building or walls that are located on the front property line. On corner lots the face of the building shall include main, walls facing the front yard and side yard or main walls fronting on all front and side property lines. 
Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
Flashing signs. Any sign, the illumination of which is not constant in intensity when in use except illuminated signs that exclusively indicate the date, time or temperature. 
Free-standing sign. A sign self supported by a pole, post, or other support and not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. A free-standing sign is not a temporary sign. By way of example, but not limiting the meaning, free-standing signs include; post and arm, monument, pole signs and other similar signs. 
Historic site: A historic or archaeological resource which meets most or all of the following conditions: it has been designated or is under official study by the National Park Service as a national historic landmark; is listed for listing in the national or state registers of historic places; has been designated or is under final evaluation by the state department of community affairs as a regionally important resource; has been designated by national organizations such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation or the Archaeological Conservancy as threatened and/or endangered, and/or worthy of protection; or has been designated as a locally significant historic resource and has protection by a local preservation committee; and contains historic, archaeological or cultural traditions that have the potential for preservation and interpretation to the public. 
Integrated business development: A development consisting of two or more interrelated business establishments with a minimum square footage of 5,000 square feet using common driveways and onsite parking facilities, including, but not limited to, shopping centers, office complexes, office buildings and business parks. 
Marquee. 
(1)  Permanent marquee. A sign painted on, attached to, or consisting of interchangeable letters on the face of a surface that is free-standing and supported by pole, post, or other support attached to the ground in a fixed location. Letter or symbols on that face of said marquee shall not exceed six (6) inches in height. 
(2)  Portable marquee. A sign painted on, attached to, or consisting of interchangeable letters on the face of a surface that is mounted or attached to a trailer, sled, or other apparatus that can me moved. Letter or symbols on that face of said marquee shall not exceed six (6) inches in height. 
Monument sign. An outside sign identifying a development, businesses, services, or homes (such as a shopping area or housing development) made of brick, masonry or stone, the bottom of which is attached directly and permanently to the ground and physically separated from any other structure. 
Nonconforming sign. A sign which lawfully occupied a building or land on or before November 21, 2001 of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Off-premise sign. A sign that identifies goods or services that are not sold on the same premises where the sign is located or directs the traveling public to a location. 
On-premise sign. A sign identifying, advertising, or directing attention to a building, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment that is being conducted, sold or offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Out-door advertising sign. An off-premise sign that identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a building, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment not conducted, sold or offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
Pole sign. A free-standing sign having at least one support in a fixed location. 
Political sign. Any sign that advertises a candidate or an issue which is to be voted on in a local, state or federal election process. A political sign shall not require a permit. 
Portable sign. A sign not designed or intended to be permanently affixed into the ground or to a structure. By way of example, but not limiting the meaning, portable signs are temporary promotional signs, portable marquee signs and other similar signs. 
Post sign. A sign that is not attached to a building but is supported by braces, post, or by any other means than by attachment to a building support. By way of example, but not limiting the meaning, a post sign is a free-standing sign comprised of a vertical post to which a perpendicular arm is attached and from which a sign hangs. 
Premises. A contiguous parcel, lot, or tract of land under a single ownership or a single lease, no part of which is separated from the other by any land under a different ownership or lease agreement. 
Projection sign. A sign that comprises one or more images (pictures) that are emitted from a device (projector) and cast upon a wall, screen, or other surface for visual viewing. A projection sign may consist of moving or still images. 
Public way. Any corridor designed for vehicular or pedestrian use that is maintained with public funds. 
Real estate sign. A sign that advertises a specific lot or parcel of real estate for rent, lease, or sale and being located upon the property for sale, rent, or lease. A real estate sign shall not require a permit. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building. 
Safety control sign. Warning, control, OSHA, or required public safety sign. 
Seasonal sign. A sole sign for a business, such as a farm or produce stand sign, displayed at least 60 days but no more than 120 days each year. 
Shopping center identification sign: A freestanding sign structure containing the name identifying an integrated business development which may also include identification signs on which the names and nature of businesses within the development are uniformly displayed. 
Sign. A sign is an object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, displayed outdoors or visible from a public way, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location; or to express a point of view, by any means including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, advertising flags, fixtures, colors, illuminations or projected images. Each substantially different face of a sign shall constitute a separate sign. 
Sign area. The entire area of the actual message or copy area. It shall include decorative trim or embellishments but shall not include structural elements outside the limits of such display surface if the structural elements do not constitute a major part of the sign or if the structure is not used to identify or attract attention to the business or product. All faces shall be counted in computing the sign area. 
Special corridor designation. Special corridor designations are established and named herein to mean those land areas within the unincorporated limits which lie within the viewshed of either side of the outermost edge of any of the roads more specifically designated in subsection 78-6(a)(4), which are of uncommon visual importance or scenic attractiveness. 
Street or highway frontage. The distance along any one side of any public street or highway, street or alley, measured along the right-of-way line or parallel to the normal right-of-way line where the right-of-way line is not fixed. 
Subdivision or development sign. A sign directing traffic to or from or within or providing information for a commercial, residential or industrial development. A subdivision or development is also a sign advertising land for sale that has been subdivided into lots or tracts for rent, lease, or sale where the sign is not located on the specific land, subdivision, or development that is being held out to the public for sale, rent, or lease. 
Temporary construction sign. A temporary sign placed by a general contractor for identification purposes on a parcel for which a land disturbance permit has been issued. Temporary construction signs may be exhibited for a period of six months or until the certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever is less. 
Temporary sign. A sign that is not constructed to become a permanent part of the lot or parcel upon which it is placed. Generally, a temporary sign has no foundation and is not permanently fastened, fixed, or attached to a structure, frame, or support in a fixed location. By way of example, but not being limited to, a temporary sign is a promotional sale sign, portable marquee sign, fund-raising sign, garage sale sign, political sign, real estate sign, subdivision or development sign, or other similar sign. A temporary sign shall not require a permit. Temporary signs may be exhibited for 14 days within a six-month period. 
Traffic control sign. A sign to regulate traffic that has been erected by municipal officers having jurisdiction over the public way. 
Viewshed. An area visible from the road that provides vistas over water or across expanses of land, such as farmland, woodlands, coastal wetlands, mountaintops or ridgelines. 
Wall sign. A sign mounted parallel, painted, or firmly attached to the exterior surface of a building and which does not extend beyond the building more than 12 inches. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-6. - Signs permitted by right. 
(a)  On-premise signs. 
(1)  In all residential zoning districts (Agricultural, R-1, R-2, R-3, R30, MHS, MFR, HDDR and PUD): 
a.  One real estate sign not to exceed 20 square feet in sign area or six feet in height located on one lot or parcel of land within the subdivision. 
b.  For single-family subdivisions and multi-family complexes, including mobile home parks, two monument sign per subdivision entrance, not to exceed eight feet in height. 
c.  For permitted including schools, colleges, publicly owned and operated community structures, community buildings, churches, similar places of worship, churches and synagogues: one free-standing monument sign not to exceed eight feet in height, one pole sign not to exceed 40 square feet of sign area and ten feet in height, one wall sign (with or without border) not larger than 20 square feet, and one temporary sign displayed less than fourteen days. All signs shall be set back 25 feet from each property line. 
d.  For permitted clubs, private and public, including golf and country clubs, fishing and hunting clubs and other similar enterprises: one free-standing monument sign not to exceed eight feet in height, one pole sign not to exceed 15 square feet of sign area and ten feet in height, one wall sign (with or without border) not larger than ten square feet, and one temporary sign displayed less than 14 days. All signs shall be set back 25 feet from each property line. 
e.  Garage sale or advertisement. An individual or entity conducting a yard sale or garage sale may place a temporary sign for 48 hours prior to the sale. However, such signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the completion of the sale. The sign shall be no larger than four square feet in sign area and shall be limited in number to one sign per premises. 
f.  Temporary sign. The landowner may place one temporary sign on the premises of that property where the sign shall be no larger than four square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign shall be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. 
g.  Temporary construction sign. A general contractor may place one temporary construction sign per entrance on the premises of the property where a land disturbance permit has been issued. The sign shall be no larger than 32 square feet in area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign shall be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. The general contractor may allow subcontractors a percentage of the temporary construction sign(s) total square footage for advertisement purposes; however, only one sign will be permitted for temporary placement. 
(2)  This paragraph shall apply in the commercial zoning districts and office and institutional zoning districts along county roads and the following state routes: State Route 166 from the unincorporated limits of Douglas County to the point where State Route 166 and State Route 61 merge; State Route 166 from the western boundary of the City of Carrollton to the eastern boundary with the State of Alabama; State Route 16, State Route 100, State Route 113, State Route 5, U.S. Route 78, State Route 61 from the northern boundary of the incorporated limits of the City of Villa Rica to the unincorporated limits of Paulding County, and other lands designated in the commercial zoning district. 
a.  It is the intent of sign regulation along these roadways is to ensure the visual compatibility with the scale and character of the surrounding architecture. The signage shall also be readable by pedestrians and people in slow-moving vehicles. The signs permitted under subsection (a)(2) shall require a permit from the sign administrator. 
b.  Types of signs permitted: 
1.  Wall signs (with or without border) as large as one square feet per three linear feet of building frontage or a maximum of 25 square feet, whichever is less. Wall signs shall cover no more than 25 percent of the total square footage of the facades to which they are affixed. 
2.  Free-standing signs. 
A.  Monument signs as large as 30 square feet in sign area with a height maximum of eight feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back ten feet or more from each property line. 
B.  Post and arm signs as large as 15 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
C.  Pole signs as large as 15 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
D.  Permanent marquee signs as large as 15 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
3.  Projecting signs as large as eight square feet in sign area; maximum projection of one foot from the building face; minimum clearance from the ground eight foot and maximum clearance ten foot. 
4.  Awning signs. Lettering up to six inches in height and (for awnings) on the valance only. The extent of the lettering may cover a maximum of eight feet in width or 50 percent of the valance width, whichever is less. Minimum clearance of ten feet from the ground. 
5.  Temporary signs as large as ten square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. 
6.  Temporary construction sign. A general contractor may place two temporary construction signs per entrance on the premises of the propepty where a land disturbance permit has been issued. The sign shall be no larger than 32 square feet in area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign shall be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. Signs shall be located at opposing ends of the construction site. The general contractor may allow subcontractors a percentage of the temporary construction signs' total square footage for advertisement purposes; however, only one sign will be permitted for temporary placement. 
c.  Number: Each commercial site having at least one business or office may not display more than three (3) permanent signs and one (1) temporary sign. Each business site may display only one (1) free-standing sign, which is included in the three permitted signs. 
d.  Materials: Permanent signs (except monument and awnings) shall be made of wood or metal. If plywood is to be used, it must have exceptionally smooth and weather resistant surfaces, such as those with medium-density overlay (MDO) board. 
e.  Location: 
1.  Signs posted on the upper facades of the buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the total square footage of the upper facade facing the street. 
2.  Signs on adjacent storefronts within the same building shall be coordinated in height and proportion, and should be encouraged to use the same signing format. 
f.  Illumination: Free-standing signs permitted under subsection (3) shall be limited to 12,000 lumen. Top mounted shielded lighting shall be used as the method of illumination. 
g.  Signs prohibited. All signs not expressly provided for within this paragraph are prohibited. 
(3)  This subsection shall apply in the commercial zoning district, office and institutional zoning district, and industrial district along State Route 27 and State Route 61 that is not provided for in subsection (2), and more particularly described as the northern boundary of the incorporated limits of the City of Carrollton to the southernmost incorporated limits of the City of Villa Rica. 
a.  It is the intent of sign regulation along these roadways is to ensure the visual compatibility with the scale and character of the surrounding architecture. The signage shall also be readable by pedestrians and people while avoiding sign clutter. The signs permitted under subsection (3) shall require a permit from the sign administrator. 
b.  Types of signs permitted: 
1.  Wall signs (with or without border) as large as one square feet per two linear feet of building frontage or a maximum of 45 square feet, whichever is less. Wall signs shall cover no more than 25 percent of the total square footage of the facades to which they are affixed. 
2.  Free-standing signs. 
A.  Monument signs as large as 40 square feet in sign area with a height maximum of eight feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back ten feet or more from each property line. 
B.  Post and arm signs as large as 20 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
C.  Pole signs as large as 20 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
D.  Permanent marquee signs as large as 30 square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of 15 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 25 feet or more from each property line. 
3.  Projecting signs as large as 16 square feet in sign area; maximum projection of six feet from the building face; minimum clearance from the ground eight feet and maximum clearance 12 feet. 
4.  Awning signs. Lettering up to ten inches in height and (for awnings) on the valance only. The extent of the lettering may cover a maximum of eight feet in width or 50 percent of the valance width, whichever is less. Minimum clearance of ten feet from the ground. 
5.  Temporary signs as large as ten square feet in sign area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. 
6.  Temporary construction sign. A general contractor may place two temporary construction signs per entrance on the premises of the property where a land disturbance permit has been issued. The sign shall be no larger than 32 square feet in area, with a height maximum of six feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign shall be set back 15 feet or more from each property line. Signs shall be located at opposing ends of the construction site. The general contractor may allow subcontractors a percentage of the temporary construction signs' total square footage for advertisement purposes; however, only one sign will be permitted for temporary placement. 
c.  Number: Each commercial site having at least one business or office may not display more than three permanent signs and one temporary sign. Each business site may display only one free-standing sign, which is included in the three permitted signs. 
d.  Materials: Permanent signs (except monument and awnings) shall be made of wood or metal. If plywood is to be used, it must have exceptionally smooth and weather resistant surfaces, such as those with medium-density overlay (MDO) board. 
e.  Illumination: Free-standing signs permitted under subsection (3) may use traditional or L.E.D. illumination subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75, as amended. If using traditional lighting, it shall be limited to 12,000 lumen with top mounted lighting. 
f.  Signs prohibited: All signs not expressly provided for within this subsection (3) are prohibited. 
(4)  Special corridor designation. Reserved. 
(5)  Shopping center signage. A business is allowed signage in accordance with its zoning district unless it is part of an integrated business development, in which case, it must follow the requirements of this subsection. 
a.  One freestanding sign. 
1.  Size and number. 
A.  One monument sign no greater than eight feet in height and eight square feet in surface area per 1,000 square feet of building space, for a total surface area not to exceed 500 square feet, to identify the shopping center and businesses therein; or 
B.  One pole sign no greater than 20 feet in height from the top of the sign to the ground. The surface area shall be no larger than four square feet per 1,000 square feet of building space, for a total surface area not to exceed 250 square feet, to identify the shopping center and businesses therein. 
2.  Setbacks. 
A.  Monument signs must be set back a minimum of ten feet from the right-of-way or any property line. 
B.  Pole signs must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the right-of-way or any property line. 
3.  Design. 
A.  Landscaping with grass and/or low-growth shrubbery is required for shopping center identification signs, in accordance with the following standards: 
i.  All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with accepted good planting procedures. 
ii.  New plant materials. All new living plant materials shall satisfy the requirements of subsection 78-6(a)(3)a.1. or better defined in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants. All separate landscaped areas where a sign is placed shall have a minimum variety of two living plant materials. Paving (other than walks) and artificial plants shall not be permitted within landscaped areas. 
iii.  Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one foot in height when measured at the time of planting. 
iv.  Lawn grass and ground covers. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where plant material other than solid sod or grass is used, a fast-growing grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. Ground covers that present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage at time of planting may be used in lieu of grass sod. 
v.  Planting bed. The planting bed for all landscaping materials shall be free of weeds, debris and noxious material and shall consist of a healthy plant growth medium. The planting bed soil shall provide adequate support, drainage and nutrients for the plants and thus may require the incorporation of sand, peat and/or topsoil into the soil. Such planting soil shall be placed throughout the planting hole for each plant, and this hole shall be at least twice as wide as the width of the plant ball and one and one-half times as deep as the depth of the plant ball. 
vi.  Maintenance. The owner or his agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a sprinkler system or readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 150 feet of all plant material to be maintained. The owner shall replace all landscaped materials required if, for any reason, they die or are severely damaged within one year of the final approval of the installation. The owner is thereafter responsible to maintain the landscaping in a healthy manner. 
B.  Signage shall be in harmony with the prevailing character and style of buildings within the shopping center, utilizing similar building materials and frame colors in order to enhance this compatibility. 
i.  The sign shall be constructed of the same materials used to cover the front facade of the shopping center. 
ii.  Frame or background colors used in the shopping center sign shall be similar to those used in the facade. 
b.  Individual business signs. 
1.  One wall sign or one projecting sign. 
A.  Each business establishment in an integrated business development is permitted one wall sign or one projecting sign. 
i.  Wall signs shall be allowed a total sign area of one square foot of signage for every three linear feet of business frontage or a maximum of 50 square feet, whichever is less. Wall signs shall cover no more than 25 percent of the total square footage of the facades to which they are affixed. 
ii.  Projecting signs may be as larges as nine square feet in sign area; maximum projection of three feet from the building face; minimum clearance from the ground eight feet and maximum clearance 12 feet. 
2.  Location. 
A.  A wall sign may be placed on any wall of the building in which the business is located except the rear wall. A wall sign may not project above the roof line of the building. 
c.  Temporary signs. 
1.  One temporary sign, such as a banner, that does not exceed eight feet in surface area is permitted for a promotional activity of an individual business establishment for a period of not more than 14 days in a six-month period. 
2.  Other temporary promotional signs shall be limited to store windows. 
d.  Freestanding signs for individual businesses, roof signs and portable signs are not permitted. 
(6)  Illumination requirements. Applicable to all on-premise signs permitted under subsections (2), (3) and (4). 
a.  Only white light may be used to illuminate a sign, except in the case of neon which is only permitted for window signs. 
b.  The illumination from any sign may not cause any reflection or glare upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent property. 
c.  Exposed lighting sources such as bulbs, tubes and the like are prohibited. All external sources of illumination must be hidden from view by shrubbery or some other permitted material. 
d.  No exterior signs on any building or premises shall be illuminated after 12:00 midnight, except on those places of business which shall remain open after midnight, and they shall be extinguished at the time of closing such business. 
(b)  Off-premise signs. 
(1)  Private directional signs. The sign administrator, in her sole discretion, may authorize a directional sign upon private property to indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public accommodations, facilities, commercial services and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational or religious interest. Directional signs permitted under this paragraph shall be limited to 30 square feet in sign area with a height maximum of eight feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back ten feet or more from each property line. 
(2)  Subdivision or development signs. The sign administrator may authorize the placement of one subdivision or development sign within 1,000 feet of each subdivision entrance. Subdivision or development signs permitted under this paragraph shall be limited to 30 square feet in sign area with a height maximum of eight feet from the ground (including the base) to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back ten feet or more from each property line. An annual renewal of all subdivision and development signs shall be required. 
(3)  Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs shall be limited to commercial and industrial areas. The signs permitted under this subsection shall require a permit from the sign administrator and shall be subject to annual fees. 
a.  A permit for an outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted under a commercial and an industrial zoning classification along state routes and federal highways where the following conditions exist: 
1.  Proximity to ongoing retail business. An outdoor advertising sign shall not be permitted if the proposed site is located more than 1,000 feet from an ongoing retail business. An ongoing retail business shall be defined as a commercial or mercantile activity that is engaged within a principal building having a minimum of 1,000 heated square feet and primarily used for the purpose of transacting a sale to a consumer or to any person. The principal building shall not include any dwelling that is used, in any part, as a residential structure. The distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the principal building to the nearest point of the outdoor advertising sign. The outdoor advertising sign shall not be permitted where the principal dwelling from which distance is measured is located on the opposite site of the roadway where the outdoor advertising sign is proposed. 
2.  Spacing. 
A.  No two outdoor advertising signs located upon, or oriented towards traffic traveling upon, the same side of a public street or road with two or more lanes shall be spaced less than 2,000 feet apart. The distance shall be measured along a straight line between the two nearest points of the signs. The minimum spacing requirement shall not apply to two panels viewed from different directions which share a common support structure. Nor shall any outdoor advertising sign be located within a 1,000-foot radius of any other outdoor advertising sign even though the two outdoor advertising signs are on different streets. 
B.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of any right-of-way of any underpass, overpass or bridge. 
C.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected within a 1,000-foot circumference of the nearest property line of any of the following: historic site, school, church, cemetery, public park or playground. 
3.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted whenever property zoned residential would be between the sign and the roadway toward which it is oriented. 
b.  Where an outdoor advertising sign may be sited, the following additional conditions shall apply: 
1.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be located in such a position that it obstructs or obscures the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in such a manner as to endanger the safe movement thereof. 
2.  No part or foundation or support of any outdoor advertising sign shall be placed on, in or over any private property without the written consent of the property owner. 
3.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be erected or maintained upon the roof of any building structure. 
c.  Required setbacks. All outdoor advertising signs shall be set back at least ten feet from any road or street right-of-way line or property line, measured from the closest part of the outdoor advertising sign. All outdoor advertising signs shall be set back at least 50 feet from any building, measured from the closest part of the outdoor advertising sign. 
d.  Height. No outdoor advertising sign shall be lesser than 30 feet or greater than 60 feet in height. This distance shall be measured from the top of the structure to the adjacent road grade. 
e.  Size and shape. No outdoor advertising sign shall exceed 300 square feet in total surface display area. 
1.  Outdoor advertising signs may be single-faced or double-faced but no outdoor advertising sign shall contain more than two faces and the surface area shall not exceed a total of 300 square feet per sign face. Billboards shall not be permitted to be stacked. 
2.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted which, because of its size, shape or location, may obscure or obstruct the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. 
3.  No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted which, because of its size, shape or location, may impair any scenic vista from the highway or a building adjacent to the highway or to the outdoor advertising sign. 
f.  Painted frame and support. Outdoor advertising signs shall be painted with no more than two colors, one color for the pole and apron respectively. The color must be visually compatible with the scale and character of the surrounding architecture and community. No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted which, because of its color, may distract the attention of motorists, creating a safety hazard. 
g.  Lighting. Outdoor advertising signs may be lighted using L.E.D. illumination subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75, as amended or traditional down-lighting up to 20,000 lumen with top-mounted shielded illumination. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-12, § 1) 
Sec. 78-7. - Signs prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with this chapter are prohibited in the county. 
(1)  Signs that are prohibited shall include, but shall not limited to any sign attached to any tree, utility pole, light pole, fixture, or other support not primarily intended to be used as a support for signage, or painted upon or otherwise directly affixed to any rock, ledge or other natural feature. 
(2)  No sign shall be erected in any zoning district under the following conditions: 
a.  In the public right-of-way, except for those placed by an authorized governmental agency. 
b.  At any location where, by reason of position, shape, wording or color, it interferes with or obstructs the view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
c.  Which may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
d.  Above the roof line, except where authorized under subsection 78-6(b)(3). 
e.  Which projects from a building over a public way. 
f.  Signs, commonly referred to as wind signs, consisting of one or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, or captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind. 
(3)  Signs on public property forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property or within a public right-of-way, except in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to the remedies hereunder, the sign administrator shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing the sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(b)  On-premise signs prohibited. All on-premise signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with this chapter are prohibited in the county. By way of example, but not being limited thereto, the following on-premise signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Projection signs or signs with optical illusion of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern capable of giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy. 
(2)  Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, except for traditional barber poles. 
(3)  Signs with illumination that flash, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color, except for time-temperature-date signs. 
(4)  Signs on a vehicle not regularly used in the conduct of the business advertised on the vehicle. 
(5)  Signs posted or painted on roofs, dormers, and balconies. 
(6)  Portable signs unless used as an authorized temporary sign. 
(7)  Outdoor advertising signs. 
(c)  Off-premises signs prohibited. 
(1)  Generally. All off-premise signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with this chapter are prohibited in the county. By way of example, but not being limited thereto, no off-premise advertising sign shall be relocated in any of the following areas: 
a.  Sites listed in either the state or national register of historic places or on sites designated as county landmarks or community landmarks. 
b.  Greenspace lands and scenic resource sites identified in a final subdivision plat that is adopted through the county subdivision ordinance, and the county greenspace plan. 
(2)  Outdoor advertising signs. Any outdoor sign which advertises, identifies or pertains to any activity no longer in existence shall be removed by its owner or persons otherwise responsible within 30 days from the time the activity ceases. 
(3)  Special designated areas. To establish, from time to time, particular areas that deserve protection and function as a special designation. New construction of out-door advertising signs shall be prohibited in such areas. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-8. - Signs exempted. 
Sign classifications: Exempted. The following signs do not require permits or fee payment but must meet the other requirements of the chapter: 
(1)  Traffic control signs. 
(2)  House addresses, family name signs, decorative flags, no trespassing and similar signs. 
(3)  Signs on vehicles regularly and customarily used to transport persons or property for the business. 
(4)  Directional signs put in place by a governmental entity. 
(5)  The flags of any nation, state, town, military or service organization (15 square feet or less). 
(6)  Safety control signs. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-9. - Political signs. 
Political signs are permitted in all zoning districts prior to a duly authorized election date, as established by applicable federal, state or local law. Political signs shall be located off public rights-of-way. All political signs or other devices must be removed within 15 days of the candidate's (or issues') election or defeat. To assure the prompt and complete removal of such signs or other devices by the applicant within the prescribed time, failure to comply with this section will result in the assessment of a $500.00 fine against the individual or group responsible for erecting the sign(s). 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1; Mo. of 4-15-08) 
Sec. 78-10. - General design and construction standards. 
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  All signs shall be constructed according with good engineering and design principles, in compliance with all building administrative codes and other building codes of the county, and in conformance with this code, at all times. 
(2)  Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, conforming in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-11. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, expand, move or place any sign which does not conform to the requirements set forth herein. Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of the chapter that do not conform to these rules and regulations shall be deemed to be nonconforming legal signs and may remain, except as otherwise specifically qualified in this chapter. 
(1)  Modifications. All nonconforming on-premise or outdoor advertising signs, displays, devices, outdoor advertising signs, or similar things, which are permanently erected and which are designed, intended or used to advertise or inform shall not be: 
a.  Changed to another nonconforming sign except that the lighting on such sign may be replaced with L.E.D. illumination subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75, as amended; 
b.  Structurally altered (except to meet safety requirements or replace the illumination from traditional to L.E.D. lighting); 
c.  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign; 
d.  Expanded; or 
e.  Re-established after its discontinuance for 180 days. 
(2)  Alteration permits. Ordinary and necessary repairs that do not change the size, shape, orientation, height, or location of an inventoried outdoor advertising sign shall not require alteration permits. Outdoor advertising sign replacements that transform the nonconforming out-door advertising sign to conforming shall require an alteration permits. 
(3)  Signs in disrepair. A nonconforming sign that has been declared by the sign administrator to be unsafe because of its physical condition shall not be repaired, rebuilt or restored unless such repair or restoration will result in a sign that complies with the rules and regulations of this chapter. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign or changing the illumination of a nonconforming sign from traditional to L.E.D. illumination subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75, as amended. No repairs other than minor maintenance, upkeep or change of illumination to L.E.D. of nonconforming signs shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Movement of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall not be moved for any distance on the same premises or to other premises unless such change in location will meet or exceed all rules, regulations, and standards set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Removal or discontinuance. If a nonconforming sign is removed or discontinued for 180 days, the subsequent construction, installation, or erection of a sign shall meet or exceed all rules, regulations, and standards set forth in this chapter. 
(6)  Change or replacement. A nonconforming sign that is changed to or replaced by a conforming sign shall no longer be deemed nonconforming. 
(7)  Temporary nonconforming signs. All nonconforming temporary signs shall be brought into compliance with this chapter or removed within 180 days from the effective date of the chapter from that this chapter is derived. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the county may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the property owner, sign owner, permit holder and/or sign erector. The county shall have the right to maintain an action at law for the recovery of the costs of such removal. If the owner is unknown and cannot be found upon reasonable investigation, the county may cause the removal of such sign. 
(8)  Violations not excused. This section shall not provide the landowner, holder of a sign permit, or other person to have the presumption or effect of excusing any violation of any other county ordinance, nor shall this section have the effect of permitting the continued existence of any unsafe sign or any sign that is not in a good state of repair. 
(b)  Maintenance and repair. 
(1)  Applicability. This section shall apply where a sign in not destroyed by a catastrophic natural event such as a tornado or other act of God. 
(2)  Sign maintenance. Signs shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition. Whenever the sign administrator finds that any on-premise or off-premise sign is not maintained in good repair and has not deteriorated more than 50 percent of its replacement value, the sign administrator shall notify the owner thereof and order him to repair the on-premise or off-premise sign within a specified amount of time not less than ten calendar days. If the sign administrator finds that the on-premise or off-premise sign has deteriorated more than 50 percent of its replacement value, and is not repaired within the time specified in the repair notice, the sign administrator shall notify the owner of the on-premise or off-premise sign and the owner of the real property on that said on-premise or off-premise sign is located to remove the on-premise or off-premise sign from the property within a specified time. Failure to comply shall authorize the director of community development to proceed under the authority of the dilapidated building and structures ordinance, provided in the county ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-12, § 1) 
Sec. 78-12. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Sign administration. 
(1)  Sign administrator. The director of community development shall appoint a sign administrator to administer and enforce the rules and regulations of this chapter and all other provisions of laws relating to signs. The sign administrator is empowered to delegate the duties and powers granted to and imposed by this chapter to other person(s) serving as a designee. The sign administrator and such other persons shall constitute the sign administration section of the department of community development. In each provision of this chapter where the sign administrator's duties and responsibilities are set forth, it is the intention of this chapter to also provide that said duties and responsibilities shall be delegable to a designee. The sign administrator is directed to enforce and carry out all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Permit required. Unless otherwise exempted, no permitted freestanding sign or any other on-premise or off-premise sign proposed for placement, construction, or installation in a commercial zoning district, industrial zoning district, office and institutional zoning district or other permitted signs as set forth in subsection 78-6(a)(1)b shall be erected, reconstructed, expanded, or replaced without securing a permit from the building official unless otherwise provided by this chapter. No building permit shall be issued unless a signage plan or application for a sign permit has been approved by the sign administrator. 
(3)  Signage plan review. A signage plan is required for all construction in the office and institutional zoning district, commercial zoning district, industrial zoning district, and for other permitted signs as set forth in subsection 78-6(a)(1)b. A signage plan is to further the purposes of this chapter and to ensure that new construction development is designed in a manner that reasonably protects visual and environmental qualities and property values of the county, and to assure safe vehicular access. A signage plan shall be submitted where the applicant seeks approval of more than one sign. Each application for signage plan approval shall be submitted to the sign administrator, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Applicants are encouraged to submit signage plans prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect or professional engineer. A comprehensive hand drawing by the applicant, which inventories the features listed below, may be submitted in lieu of the professionally drawn signage plan. All signage plans shall be prepared at a sufficient scale to show: 
1.  Location and boundaries of lot, adjacent streets or ways, and the location and owner's names of all adjacent properties. 
2.  Location of any wetlands, streams, waterbodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique natural features. 
3.  Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions and elevations. An accurate indication on the plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign, including set backs. 
4.  Proposed landscape features including the location a description of screening, fencing, and plantings. 
5.  Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the dimensions, height, number, and characteristics of proposed signs. 
6.  Certification by licensed engineer that illumination of signs complies with requirements of this chapter. 
7.  Certification by licensed engineer that on-premise and off-premises signs over ten feet in height are wind-load resistant up to 90 miles per hour. 
b.  The following criteria shall be considered by the sign administrator in reviewing and evaluating the signage plan, consistent with the permitted purposes under these regulations: 
1.  The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting properties and community amenities. Building sites shall, to the extent feasible: 
A.  Minimize use of wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, hilltops; 
B.  Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations; 
C.  Preserve unique natural or historic features; 
D.  Minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal and grade changes; and 
E.  Screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and roadways. 
2.  Architectural style of signs shall be in harmony with the prevailing character and style of buildings in the neighborhood through use of appropriate building materials, screening, breaks in roof and wall lines and other architectural techniques. Variation in detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony. 
3.  The plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. The plan shall describe estimated average daily and peak hour vehicular trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns and pedestrians showing adequate access to and from the site and adequate circulation within the site. 
(4)  Application for sign permit. This paragraph is intended to apply where an applicant is requesting the placement, construction, or installation of one sign. 
a.  Prior to the placement, construction, or installation of any on-premise or off-premise sign, the applicant shall be required to file an application with the sign administrator in the department of community development. The application shall contain the following: 
1.  An appropriate number of copies of a completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the sign administrator. 
2.  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the department of community development. 
b.  The applicant shall submit a signage plan as described above. 
(5)  Review for completeness: Within five working days of receiving an application for signage plan approval or application for a sign permit, the sign administrator shall review it for completeness. If the sign administrator finds that it is complete, the signage plan or application shall then be processed. If the sign administrator finds that it is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified within such five-day period of the specific ways in which the signage plan or application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter. Within ten working days of the submission of a complete signage plan or application, the sign administrator shall either: 
a.  Permit issuance. Approve the signage plan or issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the signage plan conforms is every respect with the requirement of this chapter; or 
b.  Permit issuance/denial action. Deny the signage plan or sign permit if the signage plan or application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this chapter. In case of a rejection, the sign administrator shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of these rules and regulations or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent. 
(b)  Sign enforcement. The duties of the sign administrator shall include not only the issuance of permits as required by this chapter, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all signs comply with this chapter and any other applicable law, and that all signs for which a permit is required do, in fact, have a permit. The sign administrator shall make such inspections as may be necessary and initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this chapter and other applicable law if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance. The sign administrator shall investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this chapter. 
(1)  Powers of sign administrator. The sign administrator shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce the conditions of this chapter and all other laws relating to signs. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
a.  Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the sign administrator. 
b.  Upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge of such property, the sign administrator or his representative may enter, for the purposes of inspecting and investigating signs or sign structures, any building, structure or other premises or property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, and where the owner, agent or tenant in charge of the property is not available after the sign administrator has made a good faith effort to locate same, the sign administrator may enter the aforementioned structures and premises at any time upon presentation of proper identification to any person on the premises. Whenever the sign administrator or his representative shall enter upon private property, under any circumstances, for the purpose of inspecting and/or investigating signs or sign structures, which property has management in residence, such management, or the person in charge, shall be notified of his presence and shown his proper and official credentials. The sign administrator or his representative, when on private property, shall observe the establishment's rule and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. Whenever the sign administrator is denied admission to inspect any premises, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant authorizing the inspection for violations of this chapter. Such affidavit shall designate the location of such place and the name of the person believed to be the owner, operator, or occupant thereof. Any warrant so issued shall constitute authority for the sign administrator to enter upon and inspect the premises described therein. 
c.  Upon notice and issuance of a stop order from the sign administrator, work, on any sign that is being conducted in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required to be given by the sign administrator. Following the issuance of a stop order, the sign administrator shall initiate proceedings to revoke any permit issued for the work covered by such stop order, consistent with section 78-12(a)(3)d of this chapter, unless the cause of the stop order is resolved to the sign administrator's satisfaction. 
d.  The community development appeals board shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this chapter for violation of the rules and regulations of this chapter, provided that the community development appeals board shall conduct a hearing prior to the revocation of any license or permit authorized under this chapter to determine the facts incident to the pending revocation. 
(2)  Hearing procedure. The following hearing procedure shall apply before the community development appeals board. 
a.  At least ten days notice of the hearing shall be mailed by first class mail to the person holding the license or permit or other appropriate party(s) of the affected property giving the date, time, and place of the hearing. An interested party may be represented by counsel. 
b.  An interested party may present evidence by affidavits, letters, reports, live testimony, photographs, videos, or any other medium generally accepted by the courts of this state. An interested party shall have the right to cross-examine any witness testifying for another party. All evidence shall be material and relevant to the issue before the community development appeals board; the chairman of the community development appeals board shall have the right to limit the presentation of evidence that is not material or relevant, that is repetitive, that constitutes harassment, or is unduly argumentative. Interested parties shall have five minutes to state their case to the community development appeals board at the beginning of the hearing and five minutes to summarize at the end. All hearings shall be recorded, and the recording shall be maintained. Except when examining witnesses, all remarks by an interested party shall be addressed to the chairman of the community development appeals board. The interested party whose property or use of property is at issue shall have the burden of proof and shall have the right to open and close the evidence and the right to open and close the summary at the end of the hearing. 
c.  In any matter before the community development appeals board, the county shall be considered an interested party. Within five days of the hearing, the community development appeals board shall mail its decision to all interested parties with reasons supporting the decision. 
(3)  Appeals. If the community development appeals board executes an action which the person holding the license or permit or other injured party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the superior court of the county by petition of certiorari. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the community development appeals board was taken. 
(4)  Violations and penalties. 
a.  Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $1000.00 for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the county attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. 
b.  Persons who erect or construct permanent signs without obtaining a permit will be notified of their violation in writing and must seek to correct the violation within 30 days of this notification. Signs that cannot be brought into compliance with this chapter must be removed. For signage that can be brought into compliance, the owner may apply for a permit, and if granted, shall be subject to double permit fees. If the owner does not act to bring his/her signage into compliance with the chapter within 30 days of notification, then the legal proceedings described in subsection 78-12(b)(4)a shall follow. 
(5)  Additional remedies. In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of these rules and regulations or any amendment thereto adopted by the board of commissioners, any owner of real estate having an affected property interest may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(c)  Inspection upon completion. Any person installing, structurally altering, or relocating a sign for which a permit has been issued shall notify the sign administrator upon completion of the work. The sign administrator shall then conduct an inspection within seven working days. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this chapter and with the building and electrical codes, the sign administrator shall affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the applicable permit by number or other reference. If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the sign administrator shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the construction is then complete, the sign administrator shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol described above. 
(1)  Lapses of sign permit. A sign permit shall lapse if the business license for the premises lapses, is revoked, or is not renewed. A sign permit shall lapse if the business activity on the premises is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more. A sign that was constructed or maintained in conformance with a permit under this chapter, but for which the permit has lapsed, shall be in violation of the chapter. 
(2)  Assignment of the sign permit. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property for the same premises, subject of to filing such application as the sign administrator may require and paying any applicable fee. The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval, provided that significant changes to the structure, in terms of height, sign area, setback and number do not occur. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-13. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  Annual renewal of permit. An annual renewal of all conforming and nonconforming off-premise outdoor advertising signs and all conforming and nonconforming on-premise business signs shall be required. 
(b)  Fees. The annual renewal fee for off-premise outdoor advertising signs and on-premise business signs shall be set at $25.00. 
(c)  Due date. Renewal fees for off-premise outdoor advertising signs and on-premise business signs shall be due January 1 of each year. Fees not received by April 1 shall be subject to a monthly penalty equal to the amount of the renewal fee each month the renewal is delinquent. 
(d)  Remedies for delinquency. Should a renewal fee remain delinquent in excess of one year, the permit shall thereafter expire. If a sign is erected and the permit expires under the provisions of this section, the sign administrator shall be authorized to institute proceedings to remove such sign. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-14. - Fees. 
(a)  Filing fees. Upon submission of an application for an on-premise sign, off-premise sign, or an outdoor advertising sign, the applicant shall submit such required filing fees as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. Said fees shall be submitted with the application and, upon acceptance of said application for review and consideration, shall be deposited into the general fund of the county. Failure to pay such fees as required, shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant, without acceptance for review or consideration by the county. 
(b)  Other fees. Following the approval of the signage plan or alteration permit, as required under sections 78-11, 78-12 and 78-13, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the applicant shall pay into the general fund of the county, such required other fees as may be established from time to time by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Method of payment. All required fees shall be paid only by personal check, corporate check, cashier's check or money order. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-15. - Protection of First Amendment rights. 
Any sign, display, or device allowed under these rules and regulations may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service for sale, and that complies with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-02, § 1) 
Sec. 78-16. - Primary and secondary intersection districts. 
(a)  Purpose. This section shall apply to primary intersection districts and secondary intersection districts, as defined herein. It is the intent of this amendment to the sign regulation to establish certain temporary and permanent uses to provide information to the traveling public while avoiding sign clutter. 
(b)  Finding. It is the intent of this section is to allow informational and directional signs that give information and direction, build the image of business and industry, respect the environment, and incorporate new methods of displaying signage. It is further intended that this section will help the county in its efforts to protect the safety and welfare of the public, implement the county's corridor protection plan ordinance, and reduce potential visual clutter by encouraging the effective use of signage. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  Sign tree. A sign tree is a free standing sign having a single vertical support with horizontal appendages that are designed to suspend separate signs. For example, the vertical support of a tree sign should resemble the main stem of a tree and the horizontal appendages may resemble the tree limbs. Appendix A provides two examples of sign trees. 
(2)  Primary intersection district. There is hereby established a primary intersection district that is designated within an area generally described as a corner of a primary intersection in the unincorporated county. For the purpose of this ordinance, a primary intersection is established where a state or federal route converges with a state route or county road. For example, and not to be limited to the forgoing, the corner of State Route 61 and State Route 166 forms a primary intersection. The primary intersection district (hereinafter PID), is further described as a triangular area having two sides running parallel to the public right-of-way for a distance of 20 feet to two points, which are further described as point A and point B, and a third side that connects point A and point B by a straight line. 
(3)  Secondary intersection district. There is hereby established a secondary intersection district that is designated within an area generally described as a corner of a secondary intersection in the unincorporated county. For the purpose of this ordinance, a secondary intersection is established where a county road converges with another county road. For example, and not to be limited to the forgoing, the corner of North Van Wert Road and North Hickory Level Road forms a secondary intersection. The secondary intersection district (hereinafter SID), is further described as a triangular area having two sides running parallel to the public right-of-way for a distance of 20 feet to two points, which are further described as point A and point B, and a third side that connects point A and point B by a straight line. 
(d)  Types of signs permitted in a primary intersection district (PID). 
(1)  Free-standing sign tree. The total permitted sign area for each sign tree, which is calculated by adding the sign faces from each separate and individual sign located upon the sign tree, shall not exceed 36 square feet. The sign face of each individual sign that is attached to the sign tree shall not exceed three square feet. The sign tree must be set back one foot or more from each public right-of-way property line. 
a.  Number. Each primary intersection district may install one permanent sign tree. 
b.  Height. The single vertical support shall not be greater than 12 feet as measured from the top of the vertical support to the adjacent road grade. 
c.  Sign area. The total sign area of a sign tree shall not exceed 36 square feet. Individual signs shall comprise the total sign area. The sign face of each individual sign shall not exceed three square feet. 
(2)  Signs prohibited. All signs not expressly provided for within this paragraph are prohibited. 
(e)  Types of signs permitted in a secondary intersection district (SID). 
(1)  Free-standing sign tree. The total permitted sign area for each sign tree, which is calculated by adding the sign faces from each separate and individual sign located upon the sign tree, shall not exceed 36 square feet. The sign face of each individual sign shall not exceed three square feet. The sign tree must be set back one foot or more from each public right-of-way property line. 
a.  Number. Each secondary intersection district may install one permanent sign tree. 
b.  Height. The single vertical support shall not be greater than 12 feet as measured from the top of the vertical support to the adjacent road grade. 
c.  Sign area. The total sign area of a sign tree shall not exceed 36 square feet. Individual signs shall comprise the total sign area. The sign face of each individual sign shall not exceed three square feet. 
(2)  Temporary signs. In lieu of installing a permanent sign tree in a SID, temporary signs may be placed in the SID as large as three square feet in sign face, with a height maximum of four feet from the ground to the top of the sign. The sign must be set back one foot or more from each property line and public right-of-way. Where no permanent sign tree is installed in a SID, three temporary signs may be placed. Temporary signs shall not require a permit from the sign administrator. 
(3)  Signs prohibited. All signs not expressly provided for within this paragraph are prohibited. 
(f)  Permitting procedure. No tree sign may be established without a sign permit issued by the sign administrator. A sign permit application shall be submitted to the sign administrator on forms provided and indicate location, size, height of sign tree, area measurements, existing and proposed signs, color, height above street grade, sign copy, and depiction or illustration of sign tree. The application shall include the required information and an application fee. The sign administrator shall determine whether the sign permit application is complete within five days after the application is filed. 
(1)  The sign administrator shall approve or deny the application within the time periods prescribed after it is determined to be complete. If a decision is not rendered within this time period, the application shall be deemed approved. If the application is denied, the sign administrator shall provide notice to the applicant in writing, which notice shall explain how an applicant may proceed under this section, and subsections 78-12(b)(2) and (3) of this chapter. 
(2)  Upon a finding by the sign administrator that the application complies with the provisions of this section, the sign administrator shall cause to be issued a sign permit for installation by the applicant. Such issuance shall be made within 15 working days of the county's receipt of the completed application unless a variance is requested. 
(3)  If a sign permit for the sign location or design applied for shall be denied, the applicant shall be notified within 15 working days of the county receipt of the completed application. The sign administrator shall advise the applicant of the specific cause of such denial, and may suggest alternative locations or design modifications. 
(4)  Any aggrieved individual may appeal the decision of the sign administrator regarding the interpretation of this section or subsequent action with respect to the issuance or denial of a permit under subsections 78-12(b)(2) and (3) of this chapter. All appeals must be submitted within 30 calendar days after a decision or action. 
(5)  Approval criteria. The sign administrator shall issue the requested sign permit if the sign permit application provides the information required by this section. Otherwise the sign administrator shall deny the sign permit application. 
(6)  Subsequent applications. When a sign permit application is denied by the sign administrator, an applicant may resubmit their application when the specific cause(s) for denial by the sign administrator have been addressed in a revised application. The revised sign permit application must include revised drawings, measurements, and any other items to remedy the causes for initial denial. 
(g)  No new permanent sign or modification of the size, materials, or design characteristics of a sign shall occur within a PID or SID unless a new sign permit is issued in accordance with the procedures established in this section. 
(Res./Ord. of 5-20-03, § 1; Res./Ord. of 2-15-05) 
Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50; natural resources, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

Sec. 82-1. - Dumping prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, refuse, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash or rubbish or any noisome, nauseous or offensive matter in or upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public park or other public property other than property designated or set aside for such purpose by the county governing authority, in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any rocks or dirt in or upon any private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or any private property, without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public park or other public property, without the consent of the state or local agency having jurisdiction over such highway, road or property. 
Sec. 82-1.5. - Definition. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste and materials destined for recycling, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes (waste materials generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations. 
Sec. 82-2. - Exemptions. 
Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual disposing of solid waste originating from his own residence onto land or facilities owned by him, when disposal of such waste does not thereby create a nuisance or adversely affect the public health or the environment or is not in violation of applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
Sec. 82-3. - Collection. 
All persons who provide collection services in the county shall provide such collection service a minimum of at least once per week. All vehicles utilized to transport such waste within the confines of the county shall be covered. 
Sec. 82-4. - Open burning. 
Open burning shall be prohibited at all disposal sites operated under county authority. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 82-5. - Receptacles. 
(a)  The garbage receptacles, known as dumpsters, bins and green boxes, located within various areas of the county are to be used only for the purpose of disposal of certain domestic household waste. 
(b)  Items which are expressly excluded and prohibited from being deposited into county garbage receptacles shall include, but not be limited to, the following: dead animals, furniture, appliances, mattresses, springs, tree limbs, wire, tires, used paint cans, materials defined as hazardous waste by EPD regulations, building debris or other items of like character. Certain items not allowed for disposal in county garbage receptacles may be accepted at convenience centers operated by the county if their rules and regulations so permit. 
(c)  The privilege of utilizing the garbage receptacles is reserved exclusively to individual residents of the county for disposal of their own household garbage. No commercial garbage collectors shall be permitted to dump into the receptacles. 
(d)  All garbage shall be deposited into the receptacle and any spillage shall be removed by the individual before leaving the receptacle site. 
(e)  No scavenging shall be permitted unless authorized in writing by the governing authority of the county and shall be limited to recyclable materials only. 
(f)  No signs erected by the county at the receptacle site shall be destroyed, defaced or otherwise altered. 
Cross reference— Location of solid waste receptacles in subdivisions, § 86-65. 
Sec. 82-6. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, violators shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 5-13-97) 
Chapter 83 - STORM SEWER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment in MS4 permitted areas, § 38-61 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 83-1—83-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 83-21. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the county separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source discharge and degradation of state waters; 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the county separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the county separate storm sewer system in the MS4 permitted area; 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the county separate storm sewer system. 
Therefore, the county adopts this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the county separate storm sewer system in the MS4 permitted area which is depicted in exhibit A attached to an ordinance of January 6, 2015, and incorporated as if set forth fully herein. Pursuant to GaNOI GAG6100000, it is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the county separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-22. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the county separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the county separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the county separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the county separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the county separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the MS4 permitted area of the county depicted in the map attached hereto as exhibit A attached to an ordinance of January 6, 2015. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Designation of article administrator. The department of public works and/or the department of community development shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-23. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
County separate storm sewer system (a.k.a. MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the county; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the county separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the county separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 83-24 of this article. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-24. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the county separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the county as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the county separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the county separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the county separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the septic sewer system through the permitting and approval process of county environmental health. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the county requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the county. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-25. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the county prior to allowing discharges to the county separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-26. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The county shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the county. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the county ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The county shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the county to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The county may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the county. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the county and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the county access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the county has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the county is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the county may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-27. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the county separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the county within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Sec. 83-28. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. Violations of this article are non-exclusive and could result in violations under Carroll County Code ch. 66, art. IV; ch. 74, art. III; and/or ch. 82. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the county is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The county is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the county finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the county may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the property owner of record in the tax assessor's office; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater discharge or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, a citation may be issued requiring the property owner of record to appear in magistrate court. In addition, if the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, representatives of the county may enter upon the subject private property if necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to eliminate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(d)  Costs. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation and the county is required to take corrective measures as set forth in subsection (c) and the property owner is found in violation of this article by the court, the county is authorized to seek reimbursement of its costs of taking remedial action. The court may order the reimbursement of the costs of remedial action be set as a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment and collected in the same means as property taxes are collected. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the county by reason of such violation. 
(e)  Criminal penalties. The county may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in magistrate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15) 
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of October 16, 2001, amended the Code by repealing former ch. 86, §§ 86-1—86-9, 86-31—86-36, and 86-61—86-65, and adding a new ch. 86 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 86 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of May 27, 1977; September 14, 1993; and September 25, 2001; and resolutions of December 8, 1998; May 9, 2000; and May 23, 2000. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 74; signs, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Title. 
The regulations shall be known as "The Subdivision Regulations of Carroll County, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall be in full force and effect on October 17, 2001. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 83-3. - Purpose. 
These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To protect and promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of Carroll County. 
(2)  To encourage economically sound and stable land developments. 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of Carroll County, Georgia. 
(4)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(5)  To assure the provision of needed open spaces and greenways in new land developments through dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other purposes. 
(6)  To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-4. - Authority and application. 
(a)  The subdivision rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of Article IX, Section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1983). 
(b)  Any subdivider of land within the unincorporated county shall first submit to the engineer of the county department of community development a preliminary plat, construction plans, and final plat of the subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth on these regulations, and no person, firm, corporation, owner, agent or subdivider shall sell, transfer, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell any land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use, of such preliminary plat or final plat of a subdivision of land without said final plat first having been confirmed by these regulations as adopted by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(c)  No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, clearing, or grubbing, before obtaining preliminary plat approval and approval of the construction plans by the engineer of the department of community development. Construction work shall be the carrying out of any building activity or the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land. 
(d)  No land dedicated as a street or other public purpose shall be opened or extended as a street or for any other purpose, and no subdivision shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the engineer of the department of community development of the county and said approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat by the engineer. 
(e)  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the unincorporated area of the county unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed, shall be opened as, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the engineer of the department of community development of the county, or unless the structure is expressly exempted by county ordinances. Provided, however, that private streets may be approved under the terms of these regulations in gated communities, condominium projects, town houses, commercial development, shopping centers or other developments. Such private streets shall be constructed to the standards set forth herein and those required by the county public works department, and certification of said standard shall be submitted to the engineer of the department of community development on the final plat, and accepted by him prior to issuance of any building permit. 
Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the county, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgment of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth in subsection 86-123(e). A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgment shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on the lot. 
(f)  No building permit may be issued, no subdivision map approved, and no greenspace plan accepted, unless the proposed construction, subdivision or plan is consistent with the subdivider's greenspace plan and good planning principles. 
(g)  No building permit may be issued for any structure which would violate an greenspace plan or an greenspace easement. 
(h)  In residential subdivisions, building permits may be issued on the basis of any approved subdivision plat as provided by these regulations only after the approval of the environmental health department and the engineer of department of community development, even though required improvements have not been completely installed, but arrangements for the improvements have been made that are acceptable to the engineer and the environmental health department. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-5. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definition. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  Certain words in these regulations are defined for the purpose herein as follows: 
Acre: For the purpose of these regulations, the term "acre," in addition to its customary and ordinary meaning, shall include any lot, tract, or parcel of land or portion thereof which is 43,560 square feet in size. A half-acre shall include any lot, tract, or parcel of land or portion thereof which is 21,780 square feet in size. 
Alley or service drive: A minor, permanent, vehicular service access to the back or the side or properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Block: A piece of parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys. 
Board of commissioners: The board of commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia. 
Building setback line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding steps, gutters and similar fixtures, and the centerline of the abutting street on which the building faces. 
County: Carroll County, Georgia. Unless otherwise specified, these rules and regulations refer to all land lying within the unincorporated portion of Carroll County as now or hereafter established. 
Comprehensive plan: A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the county or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto reviewed by the county planning commission and adopted by the board of commissioners, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other similar information. 
The comprehensive plan, of which the transportation or thoroughfare plan is a part, shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. The comprehensive plan shall be officially described as the "The Comprehensive Plan for Unincorporated Carroll County Georgia." 
Conservation easement: A nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or greenspace use; protecting natural resources; maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; or preserving the historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural aspects of real property. 
Construction plans: A set of plans that must be formally submitted to the engineer of the department of community development for review and approval following the approval of a preliminary plat on residential subdivisions or the approval of a preliminary plan for a nonresidential development project. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading plans, soil erosion and sediment control plans, hydrology studies, transportation plans, water plans, sanitary sewerage plans, on-site sewer plans and public safety plans. 
Cross walk: An area ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the plat by a vehicular turn-around. 
Department: The Department of Community Development, Carroll County, Georgia. 
Director: The director of the county department of community development. 
Easement: A grant by the property owner for the use by the public, a corporation, or persons of a strip of land for specified purposes. 
Engineer: The engineer of the department of community development, or his designee. 
Final plat: A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately, all legal and engineering information and certifications necessary for recording. 
Grant of an greenspace easement: A grant by an instrument whereby the owner relinquishes to the community or public in perpetuity the right to preserve greenspace upon the land except as may be expressly reserved in the instrument and which contains a covenant with the county, land trust, or other appropriate entity, running with the land in perpetuity or for a term of years, not to construct or permit the construction of any improvements, except as such right is expressly reserved in the instrument and except for public service facilities installed for the benefit of the land subject to such covenant or public service facilities installed pursuant to an authorization by the governing body of the county. Any such reservation shall be consistent with the purposes of the greenspace objectives of this chapter and shall not permit any action which will materially impair the open space character of the land. 
Greenspace easement: Any right or interest in perpetuity in greenspace land acquired by a county, land trust, or nonprofit organization where the deed or other instrument granting such right or interest imposes restrictions which, through limitation of future use, will effectively preserve for public use or enjoyment the natural or scenic character of such open space land. An greenspace easement shall contain a covenant with the county, land trust, or nonprofit organization running with the land in perpetuity that the subdivider shall not construct or permit the construction of improvements except those for which the right is expressly reserved in the instrument provided that such reservation would not be inconsistent with the purposes of the greenspace and this chapter and which would not be incompatible with maintaining and preserving the open space or scenic character of the land. Any such covenant shall not prohibit the construction of either public service facilities installed for the benefit of the land subject to such covenant or public service facilities installed pursuant to an authorization by the governing body of the county. 
Greenspace land: Any parcel or area of land or water which is an improved amenity or unimproved and devoted to an greenspace use as defined in this section, as any of the following: 
(1)  Greenspace for permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land whose development rights have been severed from the property, that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with, or is restored to be consistent with, one or more of the following goals: 
a.  Wetlands protection; 
b.  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
c.  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas such as marsh hammocks that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
d.  Areas required for ecologic and other scientific study purposes; 
e.  Scenic protection; 
f.  Protection of archeological and historic resources; and 
g.  The preservation of natural resources. 
(2)  Greenspace used for the managed production of resources, including but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the production of food or fiber; grazing land suitable for grazing or browsing of livestock, areas required for recharge of ground water basins; bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams which are important for the management of commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in short supply. 
(3)  Greenspace for outdoor improved recreation, including but not limited to any amenity package, which may include but not be limited to a common storm shelter, as swimming pool, tot lot, playground, clubhouse, tennis, handball, volleyball, basketball, sidewalks, bike and pedestrian paths and benches, areas which include fields for competitive sports, golf courses, amphitheaters, and capital improvements needed to support such facilities, such as parking lots and buildings; sewer-line rights-of-way, riparian buffer; and the surface area of manmade water bodies. 
(4)  Greenspace for outdoor unimproved recreation, including but not limited to areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value, areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes, including boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, skating, birding, riding horses, observing or photographing nature, picnicking, playing non-organized sports and access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major recreation and greenspace reservations, including utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors. 
(5)  Greenspace for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions such as fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas presenting fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality. 
Greenway: A greenway corridor must connect separate parcels of wildlife habitat, between which some species could not travel unless the greenway remains intact. If these areas are also suitable for human use, they should connect populations of users (for example, towns or neighborhoods) with sites which offer desired recreational opportunities (for example, parks or wildlife management areas). 
Environmental health department: The Carroll County Environmental Health Department and the Carroll County Board of Health, or authorized representative thereof. 
Historic site: A historic or archeological resource which meets most or all of the following conditions; it has been designated or is under official study by the National Park Service as a national historic landmark; is listed or eligible for listing in the national or state registers of historic places; has been designated or is under final evaluation by the state department of community affairs as a regionally important resource; has been designated by national organizations such as the National Trust for Historic Preservation or the Archaeological Conservancy as threatened and/or endangered, and/or worthy of protection; or has been designated as a locally significant historic resource and has protection by a local preservation committee; and contains historic, archeological or cultural traditions that have the potential for preservation and interpretation to the public. 
Intersection: The point or line where two or more streets meet or cross. An intersection is also the point or line where a driveway, easement of egress or ingress, private road, curb cut, alley, or point of access meets a street. 
Land disturbance permit: An official authorization issued by the department of community development, allowing defoliation or alteration of the site or the commencement of any construction activities. The land disturbance permit may be a timber permit; clearing and grubbing permit; or grading permit. 
Lot: A unit of real property that is created by being platted and designated exclusively for constructing or installing improvements thereon. A lot is portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets through which access is intended to be had from a minor street having the lowest functional classification. 
Lot, unconventional: A lot that is irregular in shape and feature, lacks compactness, or is not proportionally equal to the dimensional features of other lots within the subdivision. An unconventional lot is also referred to as a flag lot. 
Maintenance of greenspace: The performance of all acts and doing of the things necessary to care for, conserve, improve, protect, and, if appropriate, limit the future use of greenspaces and areas within the development, and to reduce the hazards of fire, erosion, and flooding in such areas. 
Natural area: A site for a protected species of plant or animal, or it must have a significant natural community of plants and animals. 
Nonprofit organization: Any organization qualifying under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code in the preceding tax year, and which includes the preservation of greenspace as a stated purpose in its articles of incorporation. Such qualification shall be demonstrated by a letter of determination from the Internal Revenue Service. 
Park: The property should be scenic, including good views of the landscape, and large trees. 
Permanently protected land and water: Land and water which is: 
(1)  Owned by a qualified nonprofit organization and designated for recreation, conservation, or natural resource protection (examples include national forest lands, wildlife refuges, parks, monuments, recreation areas, and seashores) by a conservation easement that ensures that the land will be maintained as greenspace; or 
(2)  Owned by a qualified nonprofit organization and dedicated as a Heritage Preserve (examples include wildlife management areas, parks, natural areas, and historic sites) by a conservation easement that ensures that the land will be maintained as greenspace; or 
(3)  Owned by a local unit of government, authority and subject to one of the following: 
a.  A conservation easement that ensures that the land will be maintained as greenspace; 
b.  A restrictive covenant in favor of a federal governmental entity; 
c.  Any other method that ensures the greenspace will remain forever in uses which further the goals of the Georgia Greenspace Program. 
(4)  Owned by any person or not-for-profit or for-profit entity, subject to a conservation easement that ensures that the land will be maintained as greenspace. 
Phasing or phases of development: Generally considered a portion of a subdivision which has uniform zoning and will be built in stages. 
The subdivider shall submit a conceptual plan that shows the entire subdivision and identifies the phase proposed for development. Each phase shall require the subdivider to submit the necessary documents and plans according to the preliminary plat approval process. The subdivider shall comply with the regulations adopted by the board of commissioners at the time that each preliminary plat is submitted for consideration. 
Plat: A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land, intended to be filed for record. 
Preliminary plat: A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability, but is not in final form for recording, pursuant to these regulations. 
Public fishing area: A site must offer bank or boat access to a river or stream which is capable of supporting considerable fishing pressure for desirable game-fish species. 
Right-of-way: An area or strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, railroad, electric transmission, oil or gas line, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or other special use. 
Staff: The engineer, county planner, and zoning administrator of the department of community development, or their respective designees. 
Street: A dedicated and accepted right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as highway thoroughfare, lane, road, boulevard, or otherwise. 
Definitions: Following are definitions intended to distinguish between different categories of streets. The director shall differentiate between major and minor and arterial and collector by traffic count and other relevant criteria. The director shall post a list in the department of such designations. 
(1)  Major arterials: High capacity roadways and streets that are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic, and may provide controlled access to abutting properties and have interchanges at specific locations with major and minor collector streets. 
(2)  Minor arterials: Medium to high capacity roadways and streets that are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic, and may provide controlled access to abutting properties and have interchanges at specific locations with major and minor collector streets. 
(3)  Major and minor collector: Collector streets are those which carry traffic from subdivision streets to the system of major and minor arterials. 
(4)  Commercial subdivision streets: Intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through nonresidential areas. These streets shall be designed so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(5)  County road: Any public road or portion thereof, not located wholly within the boundaries of an incorporated municipality and not now, or as of the particular time of inquiry in the future, part of a state road or urban road as defined in paragraphs (12) and (15), respectively, of O.C.G.A. § 32-10-1, as amended. A county road is intended to carry traffic from subdivision streets to the system of state and federal highways. For the purposes of this chapter, a county road is not considered a primary entrance or circulation street within an existing and future residential or commercial subdivision. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac: Dead end streets designed to have one end permanently closed. These streets should be no more than 1,500 feet in length. The engineer may approve additional length necessitated by topography or property configuration. 
(7)  Minor streets: Loop streets, cul-de-sacs, subdivision streets, and parallel streets that are used primarily for access to the abutting properties and expected to carry low traffic volumes comparable to collector streets and used to channel through traffic movements within a development to collector streets and/or arterials. 
(8)  Parallel collector street: Interior streets that are parallel to and adjacent to arterial and collector streets; and which provide access to abutting properties, which typically have double frontage, and protection from through traffic street. 
(9)  Private street: A street or way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not intended for use by the public. A private street is not intended for acceptance or has not been accepted for maintenance by the county and not owned and maintained by the state, county, or municipal corporation. 
(10)  Residential subdivision streets: Intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through residential areas. These streets shall be designed so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(11)  State road: Any public road or portion thereof which is part of the state highway system as provided by law and is owned and maintained by the state. 
(12)  Unimproved public road: An unpaved county road. 
Subdivider: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including any agent of the subdivider. The term, developer, is used interchangeably with the term subdivider throughout these regulations. 
Subdivision: Any division or redivision of a lot, tract of parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property, except that, where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of subdivision. 
Subdivision exemptions: For the purpose of these regulations, the following shall be considered subdivisions but exempt from all portions of these regulations, except as noted herein. Except as provided in paragraph f, all such subdivisions shall be drawn to final plat standards pursuant to section 86-65 and paragraphs 86-66(b)(2), (3), (5), (8) and (11), of these regulations and shall submit three copies, and the required fee as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners, to the engineer for review and approval, which shall proceed pursuant to subsections 86-26(g) and (h) of these regulations, the requirements of article IV, and the requirements stated in this paragraph. The subdivider shall comply with the county erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. Should the engineer not approve any such exemption plat, he shall express in writing (on the plat) the basis for the refusal to approve. The owner of record may file with the engineer a written appeal of the decision which together with a report from engineer shall be forwarded to the director for consideration pursuant to section 86-106 of these regulations. 
(1)  The combination or recombination of all or portions of lawful previously platted lots or parcels, existing prior to May 27, 1977, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with the county zoning resolution, as amended. 
(2)  The division of land in into four or fewer lots having a minimum lot area of at least four acres provided: 
a.  Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street which contains or shall contain the necessary right-of-way width required by these regulations at no cost to the county as determined by the engineer. 
b.  Each proposed lot shall provide at least 300 feet of road frontage, the minimum dimension of which shall be maintained to the building line of the lot. In the absence of the minimum required frontage, the engineer may, in his discretion, consider a dedicated easement having a minimum of 30 feet as egress and ingress to any landlocked parcel provided that all other requirements of subsection (2) are satisfied. 
c.  Each proposed lot shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the A (Agricultural) or R-1 (Residential-1) zoning districts. 
d.  No lot shall be more than four times as deep as it is wide at the building setback lines, unless excepted by the engineer for reasons of topography or irregularity of the entire tract. 
e.  Drive connections shall be placed to meet the visibility requirements of subsection 86-122(m)(5), provide the maximum sight distance, and meet the requirements set forth in subsection 86-125(d). 
f.  All slope and utility easements shall be provided at no cost to the county as determined by the engineer. 
g.  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the county environmental health department. 
h.  No lot thus created may be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(3)  The division of land in an appropriate zoning district into four or fewer lots having a minimum lot area of at least two acres or more, but less than four acres: 
a.  Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street, which contains or shall contain the necessary right-of-way width required by these regulations as determined by the engineer. 
b.  Each proposed lot shall provide at least 200 feet of frontage upon the public street, shall provide at least 150 feet of lot width at the building line, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning district. In the absence of the minimum required frontage, the engineer may, in his discretion, consider a dedicated easement having a minimum of 30 feet as egress and ingress to any landlocked parcel provided that all other requirements of subsection (3) are satisfied. 
c.  No lot shall be more than four times as deep as it is wide at the building setback lines, unless excepted by the engineer for reasons of topography or irregularity of the entire tract. 
d.  Drive connections shall be placed to meet the visibility requirements of subsection 86-122(m)(5), provide the maximum sight distance, and meet the requirements set forth in subsection 86-125(d). 
e.  All slope and utility easements shall be provided at no cost to county as determined by the engineer. 
f.  Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
g.  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the county environmental health department. 
(4)  The division of land in an appropriate zoning district into four or fewer lots having a minimum lot area less than two acres: 
a.  Each proposed lot fronts on an existing public street, which contains or shall contain the necessary right-of-way width required by these regulations as determined by the engineer. 
b.  Each proposed lot shall provide at least 200 feet of frontage upon the public street, shall provide at least 100 feet of lot width at the building line. 
c.  No lot shall be more than four times as deep as it is wide at the building setback lines, unless excepted by the engineer for reasons of topography or irregularity of the entire tract. 
d.  Drive connections shall be placed to meet the visibility requirements of subsection 86-122(m)(5), provide the maximum sight distance, and meet the requirements set forth in subsection 86-122(g). 
e.  All slope and utility easements shall be provided at no cost to the county as determined by the engineer. 
f.  Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
g.  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the county environmental health department. 
(5)  Single lot split: When a single lot less than seven acres is proposed to be divided from a larger parcel pursuant to any of the subdivision exemptions allowed under paragraph b, c, or d of this section above, and only the single lot is proposed to be recorded and approved for construction, the following shall apply: 
a.  The required exemption plat shall show only the individual proposed lot. Any other property or lots shown on the plat shall be labeled "NOT INCLUDED." 
b.  Environmental health department approval for on-site sewage disposal shall be achieved through issuance of a septic tank permit. The environmental health department shall not be required to sign the plat. 
c.  All other requirements pertinent to the specific type of exemption under subsection (2) or (3) of this section above shall be met. 
(6)  Single lot split. When a single lot greater than seven acres is proposed to be divided from a larger parcel pursuant to any of the subdivision exemptions allowed under paragraph b of this section above, and only the single lot is proposed to be recorded and approved for construction, the following shall apply: 
a.  The required exemption shall be depicted on a sketch showing only the individual proposed lot. Any other property or lots shown on the sketch shall be labeled "NOT INCLUDED." A deed showing ownership shall be required to accompany the sketch. 
b.  Environmental health department approval for on-site sewage disposal shall be achieved through issuance of a septic tank permit. 
c.  All other requirements pertinent to the specific type of exemption under subsection (2) or (3) of this section above shall be met. 
Wildlife management area: A site with diverse, high-quality habitat for wildlife. 
Zoning resolution: The zoning resolution and ordinance of Carroll County, Georgia, as amended. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-6—86-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 86-21. - Preapplication conference. 
Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, the subdivider is encouraged to present to the staff, preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the subdivider's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan of the county, and to inform and provide the subdivider with the necessary rules and regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-22. - Preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  Application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the engineer, pursuant to articles IV and XI of these regulations, on forms supplied by the department, proof that all taxes owed are paid, and existing or proposed covenants and restrictions. All plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect. 
(b)  The engineer shall within 15 working days after the application has been received to indicate on the plat or by a written memorandum attached thereto all comments related to compliance with these regulations, the county zoning resolution, conditions of zoning, the regulations of other county departments and state agencies, as appropriate. The subdivider shall submit a revised application in response thereto. Time may be extended for good cause shown. 
(c)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the county departments, state agencies, and engineer prior to the resubmission of the revised application. The revised application shall be submitted to the department and shall consist of six copies. 
(d)  When the engineer has determined that all of the comments have been satisfactorily addressed he shall issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval which shall be affixed to each copy of the plat. 
(e)  Should an subdivider disagree with the comments of the engineer as provided in subsection 86-22(b), concluding factual or interpretive errors have been made the following appeal procedure is designed to resolve the issues. 
(1)  Submit to the engineer a written statement clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the section of these regulations at issue, and the applicant's own opinion. 
(2)  Should the engineer, after review of the applicant's statement, conclude that neither these regulations or conditions of zoning would be violated, the engineer shall modify his comments accordingly. However, should the engineer conclude that these or other applicable regulations would be violated, the case shall be referred to the county attorney for an opinion and the matter brought before the director at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting after the written opinion of the county attorney has been received by the director. 
(3)  The director shall after receiving the opinion of the county attorney and report from the engineer decide the issue. Said decision shall constitute the final administrative appeal. 
(f)  Preliminary plat approval shall continue in effect for a period of two consecutive years after which time a new certificate shall be required by these regulations unless the land area submitted under the preliminary plan has received final plat approval. In the event that a new certificate is required, the engineer may require the resubmission of construction plans, soil and erosion control plans, or other plan in compliance with these regulations. Construction of the project must begin within one year of construction plan approval. If the time limit is exceeded, the project shall be void and subject to re-application. 
(g)  Subdivider/developers shall be responsible for damage and maintenance of previously accepted streets when undergoing construction on staged developments. When construction traffic of new stages/developments impact severely on existing county streets, as determined by the public works department and the developer fails to take necessary corrective action, permits may be voided or with-held until proper repairs have been made. Also, the developer's maintenance bond may be used for these off site repairs and maintenance. 
(h)  Preliminary plat shall show phases of development. 
(i)  No preliminary plat shall be recorded. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-23. - Greenspace plan. 
If a conventional subdivision received conditional zoning requiring greenspace lands, the subdivider shall provide the information as set forth in sections 86-142, 86-147, 86-149, and 86-150 prior to final approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02) 
Sec. 86-24. - Construction authorization. 
(a)  Following the approval of the preliminary plat and while the certificate of preliminary plat approval is in effect, final engineering plans and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans shall be submitted for approval prior to any defoliation or alteration of the site or the commencement of any construction activities. Said plans shall be in compliance with all design standards and erosion control regulations as adopted by Carroll County, and shall include a grading plan, construction plans and such other engineering documents as may be required by the department of community development including, but not limited to, a hydrological study, soil sedimentation and erosion controls while the project is under development, and provision for water detention/retention and the method of continuing maintenance of these facilities if required. 
(b)  Prior to any defoliation or alteration of the site or the commencement of any construction activities and following the approval of construction plans, soil sedimentation plans and approval on receipt of other such plans or documents as may be required, a land disturbance permit shall be obtained from the department of community development. 
(c)  Prior to the commencement of any work and as a prerequisite for issuance of a land disturbance permit, the subdivider shall file with the engineer an indemnification agreement, indemnifying the county against claims and liability arising out of water drainage problems resulting from the development. The indemnifications agreement shall be in the form supplied in appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-25. - Application for final plat. 
Whenever the provisions of these rules and regulations have been complied with and while the certificate of preliminary plat approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the engineer an application for final plat review and approval pursuant to articles IV and XI. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-26. - Final plat review and approval process. 
(a)  The engineer shall as soon as possible after receipt of the application determine whether all of the required documents are included with the application. If the engineer determines that the application is incomplete, the engineer shall notify the subdivider of the items necessary to complete the application. All further processing shall cease until the department of community development has received a complete application. 
(b)  If the engineer determines that the application is incomplete, he shall indicate on the application or by a written memorandum attached thereto all comments related to compliance with these regulations, the county zoning resolution, the regulations of other county departments, and state agencies as appropriate. 
(c)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the engineer prior to the resubmission of the revised application. The revised application shall be submitted to the department and shall consist of three copies and the revised two originals. When the engineer has determined that all of the comments have been satisfactorily addressed he shall transmit the original of said plat and documents as appropriate to other affected departments and agencies of government for signature. 
(d)  Final approval by the engineer shall not be shown on the final plat until all requirements of these rules and regulations have been met, and the engineer or his designee has certified by letter or endorsement on the plat that a bond has been received providing for the maintenance of all installations and improvements required by these rules and regulations in the subdivisions for a period of twelve months following the date of final inspection and approval of streets by the director of public works and either paragraphs a, b, c, or d below. If the infrastructure improvements are not properly maintained to the satisfaction of the county by the end of the 12-month period from the date of final inspection and approval of streets by the director of public works, the maintenance bond may be extended for an additional 12 months or other time as required under these rules and regulations (see appendix B to this chapter). 
(1)  All improvements and installations to the subdivision required for approval of the final plat under the rules and regulations of the county have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or, 
(2)  All of the drainage and retention/detention facilities, water and, if applicable, sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the final plat have been completed and, for those required improvements not yet completed (pavement topping), a performance bond shall have been filed by the subdivider in the office of the engineer prior to or coincidental with the filing of the final plat application which performance bond shall: 
a.  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required to complete improvements, installations, and greenspace improvements for the subdivision, or approved unit division thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a specified time; 
b.  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of the county; 
c.  Be in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed plus an additional percentage of said costs, as established from time to time by the chairman of the board of commissioners. The bond amount shall be calculated by the director, based upon the approved percentage; 
d.  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; 
e.  Be approved by the director or the county attorney or, 
(3)  All of the drainage and retention/detention facilities, grading, water and, if applicable, sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the final plat have been completed and, for those required improvements not yet completed (pavement topping), a cash deposit, escrow account or other instrument of financial security having an AM Best Rating of A-6 or higher and approved by the county attorney shall have been deposited with an agent approved by the director equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed plus an additional percentage of said costs, as established from time to time by the chairman of the board of commissioners. The bond amount shall be calculated by the director, based upon the approved percentage. Such cash deposits, escrow account or other instrument shall be accompanied by an agreement in writing directed to the county containing in substance the same terms and conditions as provided, however, that sufficient funds are retained in said cash deposit of escrow account to complete construction of all required improvements. Upon final acceptance of all such improvement, all funds remaining in said deposit of account shall be returned to the depositor. 
(4)  In the alternative to a cash deposit, escrow account or other instrument of financial security referred to in subparagraphs b and c above, the director may consider in his discretion the use of an agreement with the subdivider for the completion and installation of greenspace improvements in the development. The county attorney shall approve the form of the agreement and the chairman of the board of commissioners shall have the authority to execute the agreement. 
(e)  Upon completion of the improvements required by these regulations and prior to the approval of the final plat by the engineer, and subdivider shall present to the engineer one complete set of the construction plans and drawings with each page of the set sealed by an engineer registered in the state, showing the subdivision and it's improvements have been completed according to approved plans. The subdivider may submit drawings and plans received from subcontractors. These drawings and plans shall include the following: 
(1)  As-built plans of all streets and alleys showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines. 
(2)  As-built centerline profile of all streets where final grades vary from the approval plans. 
(3)  As-built horizontal and vertical alignment including profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines. 
(4)  As-built volumes and elevations of all detention facilities. 
(5)  Letter of acceptance of water and/or sewer lines. The subdivider must submit a letter to the department from the county water authority. The letter shall verify the authority's acceptance of subdivision's water and/or sewer lines and other utility construction. 
(f)  Priority of environmental health department. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as preventing the environmental health department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon, or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in these regulations are inadequate and must be increased to insure the protection of public health. 
(g)  Once the engineer has approved the plat and other affected departments and agencies of government as required have certified compliance and signed the original, the director shall certify by his signature on the original of the plat that all of the requirements of these regulations, the county zoning resolution, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met. 
(h)  Having so certified, the engineer shall record same with the clerk to the superior court of the county. 
(i)  If approved, the subdivider will be required to pick up one of the approved mylars of the final plat and provide the department with additional number of copies as required by the engineer of the approved and stamped final plat. Approved plats will be recorded by the department. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-27. - Revised final plat. 
When it becomes necessary to revise a recorded final plat due to some error, required or desired adjustment, the developer shall confer with the staff to verify that such proposed revision will comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and these regulations and shall confer with the environmental health department to verify that such proposed revision will comply with the state's health regulations. 
(1)  If it is established that such a revision is appropriate and feasible, the subdivider shall have such subdivider's surveyor make the corrections of that portion of the subdivision involved. The subdivision name, date, and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. Revisions and a notation explaining the revisions shall also be shown on the revised plat. 
(2)  Plat revision. An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through final plat revision process. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the engineer and recorded. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall indicate thereon that the revision is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
(3)  Application for revised final plat. The subdivider shall submit three copies and two mylars of the revised plat to the department. 
(4)  The engineer shall as soon as possible after receipt of the application determine whether any appropriate documentation is included with the application. If the engineer determines that the application is incomplete, the engineer shall notify the subdivider of the items necessary to complete the application. All further processing shall cease until the department of community development has received a complete application. 
(5)  If the engineer determines that the application is incomplete, he shall indicate on the application or by a written memorandum attached thereto all comments related to compliance with these regulations, the county zoning resolution, the regulations of other county departments, and state agencies as appropriate. 
(6)  If approved, the subdivider will be required to pick up one of the approved mylars of the final plat and provide the department with additional number of copies as required by the engineer of the approved and stamped final plat. Approved plats will be recorded by the department. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-28—86-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §§ 86-41—86-48, in its entirety. Former art. III pertained to procedures for conservation subdivisions, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 

Secs. 86-41—86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 86-61. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
(a)  The submittal to the engineer shall consist of a number as required by the engineer of black or blue line prints on white background, and such other documents in number of copies as required by the engineer as are necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not greater than 100 feet to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 48 by 36 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 by 22 inches; however, the engineer may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
(c)  The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in the county. If shown to the contrary, the staff may refuse to accept such subdivision and street names. 
(d)  The preliminary plat shall contain general information, existing conditions, and proposed conditions as shown and incorporated in appendix E to this chapter, and pay the required fee. 
(e)  If the construction plans propose residential development, it shall contain the preliminary plat, general requirements, engineering for grading/storm drainage, engineering for site hydrology study, engineering for soil erosion and sediment control, transportation information, environmental health department information, and general notes as shown in and incorporated through appendix F to this chapter, and pay the required fee. 
(f)  If the construction plans propose nonresidential development, it shall contain the preliminary plat, general requirements, engineering for grading/storm drainage, engineering for site hydrology study, engineering for soil erosion and sediment control, transportation information, environmental health department information, and general notes as shown in and incorporated through appendix G to this chapter, and pay the required fee. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-62, 86-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-64. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  The submittal shall consist of two time-stable reproducible originals and number of copies as designated by engineer and proof that all taxes owed are paid. All plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect. 
(b)  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on mylar at a recommended scale of 100 feet to the inch. The engineer may approve other scales as appropriate. The maximum sheet size shall not exceed 42 by 30 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, then said plat shall be shown on several sheets with an index map indicated on each sheet. The minimum sheet size shall not be less than 17 × 22 inches. Arrangements shall be made with the staff prior to final plat recording for the reduction of sheets larger than 17 × 22 inches, per Georgia Plat Act. Regardless of the chosen sheet size, there shall be sufficient space available for the certificates as required in this article. 
(c)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the phasing established in preliminary plat procedure and to the requirements of these rules and regulations. 
(d)  The final plat shall contain general information and environmental health department information as shown in and incorporated through appendix H to this chapter, and pay the required fee. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-65. - Addressing and building numbers. 
(a)  Street addressing. Prior to final plat approval, street numbers shall be submitted by the subdivider and, if appropriate, approved by the engineer or his designee. A number shall be assigned to all primary buildings and structures according to the following standards: 
(1)  For corner lots, or those lots having multiple street frontages, an address shall be assigned for each street meeting the minimum required street frontage. The person who constructs a building or structure on a corner lot shall designate a street number on the building permit from among the numbers assigned on the final plat. All other permits issued for the corner lot shall identify this number as the street address. 
(2)  The driveway and mailbox shall be located onto the street assigned the number on the final plat. If in the opinion of the director the driveway leading to the building or structure is moved to the extent that the number no longer corresponds to the street number provided on the final plat, the final plat must be modified according to the procedure set forth in section 86-27. No inspection shall be made under these circumstances and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the final plat is modified. 
(b)  Building numbering. 
(1)  Assigning numbers; size; when to be erected; inspections not to be made unless numbers erected. Street numbers for the addressing system shall be assigned for all buildings and structures. Numbers must be erected and displayed in front of the project on a board with permanent numbers not smaller than two inches. Numbers must be in place at the beginning of the job before the footing inspection is made and must correspond to the address provided on building permit. The number shall be continuously displayed thereafter until the job is complete and all final inspections have been made. No inspection will be made where street numbers are not in place as required above. Contractors and others shall always refer to the street number when calling the department for an inspection request or information. 
(2)  Designation of street numbers. Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets and street numbers or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartment projects and nonresidential developments located on private streets shall be assigned by the department in accordance with its administrative procedures. 
(3)  Posting. 
a.  Each one-family and two-family dwelling unit constructed after October 17, 2001, shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background. 
b.  Each one-family and two-family dwelling unit constructed prior to October 17, 2001, shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least one inch high on a contrasting background. 
c.  Each multifamily (three or more dwelling units) building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address(es) or number(s) of the building in figures at least six inches high on a contrasting background and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background. In addition to the above, where a multifamily building has more than one exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked, in figures at least three inches high on contrasting background, with the numbers and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. This shall be effective on all new and existing units October 17, 2001. 
d.  Each place of business shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of the place of business in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background. This shall be effective on all new and existing places of business October 17, 2001. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-66. - Plat certificates. 
(a)  Each application for preliminary plat submitted pursuant to section 86-22 shall carry the following certificates, as shown in appendix I to this chapter, printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary engineering certificate; 
(2)  Certificate of design; 
(3)  Safe dams certificate; 
(4)  Application for plat improvements; 
(5)  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. 
(b)  Each application for final plat (except as is provided for exemption on plats) submitted pursuant to section 86-26 of these regulations shall carry the following certificates, as shown in appendix J to this chapter, printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
(1)  The final engineering certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
(2)  Safe dams certificate. 
(3)  The surveyor's certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
(4)  The owner's certificate shall appear on all final plats. The areas to be dedicated, however, shall be specified to that which are to be in the public domain. 
(5)  The flood hazard certificate shall appear on all final plats whereon the intermediate regional flood (I.R.F.) is known to exist. 
(6)  The drainage certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
(7)  Specifications for final plats involving private streets. No final plat involving a private street shall be approved for recording unless and until it shall contain the private street certification on all final plats. 
(8)  Final plats involving special tax districts. 
(9)  Final plat approval. 
(10)  Certificate of dedication. 
(11)  Current note—County department of public works. 
(12)  Recording information. 
(13)  Department certification. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-67—86-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former art. V, §§ 86-81—86-85, in its entirety. Former art. V pertained to plat specifications for conservation subdivisions, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 

Secs. 86-81—86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE LAND 

Sec. 86-101. - Suitability of the land. 
(a)  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, and any land deemed to be unsuitable for development as determined by the department of public health shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger of health, safety, life or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
(b)  Land within a proposed subdivision detrimental to the development of the subdivision shall be set aside for uses as shall not be endangered by the conditions set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-102. - Access. 
(a)  Every subdivision entrance shall be served by public streets. 
(b)  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(c)  No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(d)  A subdivider having a burial plot, cemetery, burial ground, or other area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains shall identify and convey a perpetual easement upon the final plat to grant access to immediate family and descendants interred in the burial plot and other interested persons. The perpetual easement shall be duly recorded in the official records of the clerk of superior court. A copy of the perpetual easement shall be delivered to the cemetery committee of the county. All subsequent landowners, shall preserve and protect the cemetery or burial ground and keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may also include the cleaning, maintenance, and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 
(e)  Each lot shall have the required frontage as set forth in this chapter. Access to said lot shall be had from the public street on which the required frontage lies. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-103. - Conformance to the county comprehensive plan. 
(a)  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, and development policies in effect at the time of submission. 
(b)  The engineer shall disapprove plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(c)  Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the engineer or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the engineer may either refuse to approve said plats or it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-104. - Zoning and other regulations. 
Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply unless the application for zoning received conditional zoning approvals from the board of commissioners or waivers from the express requirements of the subdivision regulations, which shall be specifically identified in the official minutes, or recorded and attached as a development plan as part of the official minutes. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-105. - Modification. 
(a)  Modifications of the provisions set forth in these regulations may be authorized by the engineer in specific cases when, in his opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based on the fact that unusual topographical, other exceptional conditions require such modification, and that the granting of the modification will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations. 
(b)  Should the engineer refuse a request to modify brought under subsection 86-105, the applicant may request an appeal hearing before the director. Said appeal shall be in writing, stating the modification being sought, and the reasons why the request should be granted. The appeal shall be filed with the engineer who shall place it before the director who shall have the authority, after hearing from both the applicant as well as the engineer, to grant, modify, or deny the appeal. 
(c)  The following hearing procedure shall apply before the director. 
(1)  At least 15 days notice of the hearing shall be mailed by first class mail to the subdivider or other appropriate party(s) of the affected property giving the date, time, and place of the hearing. An interested party may be represented by counsel. 
(2)  An interested party may present evidence by affidavits, letters, reports, live testimony, photographs, videos, or any other medium generally accepted by the courts of this state. An interested party shall have the right to cross-examine any witness testifying for another party. All evidence shall be material and relevant to the issue before the director; the director shall have the right to limit the presentation of evidence that is not material or relevant, that is repetitive, that constitutes harassment, or is unduly argumentative. Interested parties shall have five minutes to state their case to the director at the beginning of the hearing and five minutes to summarize at the end. All hearings shall be recorded, and the recording shall be maintained. Except when examining witnesses, all remarks by an interested party shall be addressed to the director. The interested party whose property or use of property is at issue shall have the burden of proof and shall have the right to open and close the evidence and the right to open and close the summary at the end of the hearing. 
(3)  In any matter before the director, the county shall be considered an interested party. Within 10 days of the hearing, the director shall mail its decision to all interested parties with reasons supporting the decision. 
(4)  If the director executes an action which the subdivider or other injured party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the superior court of the county by petition of certiorari. Findings of fact may not, however, be appealed. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the director was taken. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-106. - Wetlands permit required. 
The wetland permit program under section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, requires a federal permit before physically encroaching upon any wetlands. A section 404 permit shall be required before any land disturbance permit, building permit, or other permit be issued where the activity allowed under the requested permit physically encroaches upon wetlands. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-107—86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 86-121. - Generally. 
The design standards set forth in this article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the engineer, except that standards for improvements shall be applicable only to those plats for which improvements or improvement plans are required as a condition of plat approval. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-122. - Streets in general. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the requirements herein and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where location of a street is not shown in the thoroughfare plan for the county, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width, or 
(2)  Conform to a plan approved or adopted by the board of commissioners to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be so laid out so their use by cut-through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the engineer of community development may require the subdivider to provide a permanent vehicular turnaround, when it is considered necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
(e)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major arterial, minor arterial, major collector, minor collector, or county road, the county engineer may require parallel collector or minor street or double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property lines which abut said arterial, collector, or county road. In the alternative, the county engineer may require such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of cut-through and local traffic. 
(f)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or arterial highway right-of-way, the community development department shall require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such intervening land. 
(g)  Street right-of-way widths shall be dedicated based on the classification of the street for the county, and shall be not less than as follows: 
(1)  Commercial subdivision streets (industrial, commercial, and multi-family) ..... 70 feet 
(2)  Residential subdivision streets (single family) ..... 60 feet 
(3)  Cul-de-sac turnaround diameter: 
a.  Commercial and industrial ..... 140 feet 
b.  Residential ..... 120 feet 
(h)  Street paving widths, including curb and gutter, shall be based on the classification of the street and shall not be less than follows: 
(1)  Commercial subdivision street (industrial, commercial, and multi-family) ..... 32 feet 
(2)  Residential subdivision street ..... 28 feet 
(3)  Cul-de-sac turnaround diameter: 
a.  Commercial and industrial ..... 110 feet 
b.  Residential ..... 100 feet 
(i)  The subdivider shall be required to improve streets to the minimum standards. 
(j)  Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be built to state department of transportation and public works department design standards. 
(k)  Where subdivision abuts an existing street, the subdivider shall dedicate or reserve additional right-of-way on said existing streets to meet the above minimum street width requirements from the appropriate side of the centerline. 
(l)  The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) book, "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highway and Streets" (latest edition) is the standard reference to be used in the design of road grades, curvature, and sight distance. 
(m)  Alignment. 
(1)  Minimum vertical. In residential subdivisions vertical curve lengths must be at least 10 times the algebraic difference in grades, with the grades expressed in feet per hundred. No vertical curve shall be less than 50 feet. All roads shall have a crown on one-quarter inch per foot except where super-elevation prevails. 
(2)  In approached to intersections, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding two percent for a distance of not less than 50 feet, exclusive of any portion of a vertical curve, for local and minor streets, and 100 feet, exclusive of any portion of a vertical curve, for collector or major streets, from the nearest line of the intersection street. 

 
(5)  Visibility requirements. At the intersection of traffic on a county road, collector street, or subdivision street, which shall include driveways, said intersection shall be designed in accordance with the maximum sight distance in either direction along the county road, collector street, or subdivision street as required in the following table. 
a.  55 miles per hour (mph) ..... 500 feet 
b.  50 miles per hour (mph) ..... 450 feet 
c.  45 miles per hour (mph) ..... 400 feet 
d.  40 miles per hour (mph) ..... 325 feet 
e.  35 miles per hour (mph) ..... 275 feet 
f.  30 miles per hour (mph) ..... 225 feet 
Sight distance shall be measured from a point 15 feet from the edge of the travel way at a height of 3.5 feet above the surface of the roadway to an object on the centerline of the road two feet above the surface of the roadway. Sight distance shall be measured and field certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. A certification statement shall be placed on the constructions plans. 
(6)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 80 degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required. 
(7)  Curbline radius at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees or the presence of other obstructions (such as islands, medians, etc.); the public works department may require a greater radius. 
(8)  Right-of-way radius at street intersection shall parallel the curbline radius. 
(9)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(10)  Alleys or service drives may be required on any lot to be used for multi-family, commercial, or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the community development department of the need for alleys or service drives. 
(11)  Half-streets along property lines shall be prohibited. 
(12)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted unless control is definitely placed in the county under conditions acceptable to the engineer. 
(13)  Every subdivision and every lot within the subdivision shall have frontage or abut on a minor street that is to be dedicated to the public and conforms to the requirements of these regulations, unless an approved driveway easement is accepted or otherwise approved by the engineer. Generally, lots shall not derive access exclusively from any street designated as county road or higher classification. 
(14)  A maximum of 100 residential dwelling units shall be allowed to be constructed with only one street outlet onto an existing state or county road. If a second access to an existing state or county road is not available or, in the opinion of the engineer, could induce nonresidential cut-through traffic in the development, a single entrance may be allowed if designed with a traffic signal and/or sufficient right-of-way and improvements to provide a protected left-turn lane. The improvements shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and the public works department. Subdivider shall be responsible for making necessary improvements. 
(15)  Culs-de-sac shall mark the termination of the right-of-way of each street. Unless a final plat specifically reserves land within a subdivision as right-of-way for egress and ingress, or a future roadway that is part of a phased development project, no new street or extensions thereof shall be allowed through any cul-de-sac or lot that is shown on a final plat. The subdivider may request the modification through section 8.6 to extend such a street or provide an additional point of egress and ingress. 
(16)  No obstacles, landscape island, planters or other type of impediment shall be constructed or installed in any cul-de-sac. Notwithstanding the preceding, the engineer may determine, in his discretion, that a landscape island or planter may be constructed and installed in a cul-de-sac after the diameter of the cul-de-sac is increased to allow for safe and unimpeded transport of emergency vehicles and school buses. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Cross reference— Roads and bridges, ch. 74. 
Sec. 86-123. - Private streets. 
(a)  Private streets permitted. Private streets may be permitted upon application to the director in gated communities, condominium projects, town houses, commercial development, shopping centers or other developments, subject to the requirements of this section. Applications for approval of private streets shall be considered by the director only after approval of a sketch plat. The director may impose conditions on the approval of private streets to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and to mitigate potential problems with private streets. A private street shall not be permitted or approved when it is proposed as a future public street. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining a land disturbance permit for such construction or alteration from the department. 
(2)  All private streets shall be constructed to current county specifications and all standards for public streets as required by this chapter. No land disturbance permit for a private street shall be issued unless the proposed street is in conformity with standards and requirements for public streets and the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  No final plat involving a private street shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  All provisions of this article regarding public streets, including the design, submittal of plans, required improvements, etc., shall apply to all private streets approved pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Street names and easements for private streets. Private streets shall be named. The subdivider of land involving a public street shall install street signs with content containing the street name and the designation "private," as approved by the engineer. The sign identifying the private street shall be a different color than that of public street signs, and the director shall designate the appropriate private street sign color. Easements for private streets shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility easements, along with the name of said private street. Said easement shall at minimum be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a public street and the engineer for the type of public street (subdivision, etc.) most closely resembling the proposed private street. Easements for private streets shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size or density limitations established by this chapter. The utility easement for a private street shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
(d)  Maintenance. The county shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve streets, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. A private maintenance covenant recorded with the county clerk of the superior court shall be required for any private street and other improvements within general purpose public access and utility easements established for private streets. The covenant shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for noncompliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of easements, and other pertinent considerations. The covenant shall specifically include the following terms: 
(1)  The covenant shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. 
(2)  The covenant shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision fronting on a private street. 
(3)  The covenant shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(4)  The covenant for maintenance shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private street. 
(5)  The covenant shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private street. 
(6)  The covenant shall run with the land. 
(7)  The director may, at his discretion, as a condition of approving private streets, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond to be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, or the director may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the engineer into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private streets and stormwater management improvements, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. 
(e)  Requirement for purchaser's acknowledgment of private responsibilities. Prior to the sale or as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private street in the county, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgment of private street construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgment shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
Purchaser's Acknowledgment of Private Street and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility 
(I) (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant which pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction _______ (insert address or attach legal description). (I) (We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) (we are) purchasing and requires (me) (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private street and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am) (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue and recover for those costs which this covenant requires (me) (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) (our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I) (We) further understand that the County has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvements of the private street, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the general purpose public access and utility easement for the private road servicing the lot in question. (I) (We) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgment shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) (we are) purchasing. 
         Purchaser 
         Purchaser 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Cross reference— Roads and bridges, ch. 74. 
Sec. 86-124. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provisions for adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to the lot size and dimensions unless a planned unit development is contemplated. 
(3)  Need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  In general, residential blocks shall not be greater than 1,500 feet in length, or less than 600 feet in length. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the engineer may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public walkways across the block. 
(c)  Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where adjacent to a state or county road, or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the engineer may require and/or approve a single tier of lots in minimum depth. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-125. - Lots. 
(a)  Residential lots fronting a minor road, cul-de-sac, or residential collector and having the point of egress and ingress with the minor road, cul-de-sac, or residential collector shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to streetlines; and every lot shall have a minimum of 60 feet of frontage on a minor street, except for cul-de-sac frontage which shall be 45 feet minimum. 
(2)  Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 150 feet, unless circumstances make these limitations impracticable. 
(3)  No lot within a subdivision shall be approved that constitutes an unconventional lot. 
(4)  The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing minor street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  Where the subdivision abuts a state or county road, the subdivider shall construct a minor street to access all double frontage and reverse frontage lots (i.e., lots having street frontage both in front and rear). When extraordinary, exceptional, or peculiar conditions exist for a particular tract of land, an administrative decision may be granted for driveway connections. In any case, drive connections shall be placed to meet the visibility requirements of this article and provide the maximum sight distance available for the tract. 
(6)  In residential subdivisions abutting a state or county road, the subdivider shall establish a no-access easement of at least ten feet in width to the lots abutting the state or county road, across which there shall be no right of access to the state or county road. In the no-access easement, the subdivider shall plant a single line of shrubs or trees, or construct a decorative fence, or other such treatment as may be proposed and approved by the engineer. 
(7)  Corner lots shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from, and orientation to both streets. Corner lots shall have driveways on only one street. 
(8)  Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(9)  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, shall be such that lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerline of the lake. Such requirements may be waived upon submittal to the engineer of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. The portion of any lot within a one-hundred year floodplain or covered by water or having a slope of 35 percent or greater shall not be included within the lot area used for determining the minimum required area of each lot. 
(b)  Commercial lots fronting a minor road, cul-de-sac, or commercial collector and having the point of egress and ingress with the minor road, cul-de-sac, or commercial collector shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Size, shape and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted, shall be subject to the approval of the engineer. 
(2)  The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing minor street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Where the subdivision abuts a state or county road, the subdivider shall construct a minor street to access all double frontage and reverse frontage lots (i.e., lots having street frontage both in front and rear). When extraordinary, exceptional, or peculiar conditions exist for a particular tract of land, an administrative decision may be granted for driveway connections. In any case, drive connections shall be placed to meet the visibility requirements of this article and provide the maximum sight distance available for the tract. 
(4)  Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(5)  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, shall be such that lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerline of the lake. Such requirements may be waived upon submittal to the engineer of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. The portion of any lot within a one-hundred year floodplain or covered by water or having a slope of 35 percent or greater shall not be included within the lot area used for determining the minimum required area of each lot. 
(c)  Obstructing visibility at intersections. On any corner lot, within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a line (miter) on the street sides of such lot and a line (miter) joining points on such lot lines located at a distance of 20 feet from the point of the intersection, the following shall apply: 
(1)  There shall be no fence, wall or hedge higher than three feet. 
(2)  There shall be no obstruction to vision, other than a post or column or tree (except that erected by the county) not exceeding one foot in greatest cross-sectional dimension, between a height of 15 feet above the established grade of either of the intersecting streets. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the preceding, no fence, wall, hedge, shall be permitted along the street sides of corner lots where such fence, wall, hedge, or other obstruction would impair the visibility of traffic and traveling public. 
(d)  Driveways. 
(1)  Lot arrangements and minor street systems shall be designed in subdivisions so as to eliminate the need for driveway cuts from any lot to an existing state or county road. 
(2)  Driveways shall be designed and arranged to access minor streets. If access must be obtained from a state or county road, the driveway shall be designed and arranged to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic. If a driveway is to access a state or county road, the physical location of the driveway shall meet or exceed the distances and spacing between existing driveways and roads as set forth in the table below. 

 
(3)  When a residential lot has multiple frontages, the driveway cut(s) shall be located on the street with the lowest functional classification or the street having the lowest traffic count. 
(4)  The sharing of curb cuts by lots shall be limited to two dwelling units. The sharing of private access ways shall be shall be limited to two dwelling units. 
(5)  Driveways shall generally intersect streets at right angles. 
(6)  Driveways shall be constructed so as to have no more than a 5% upward grade. For those drives not meeting this requirement, a distance of 40 feet from the right-of-way shall be paved and sloped to direct drainage into ditches and away from the street pavement so as to not present a hazard to life or safety. The paved portion of a driveway shall be maintained by the owner. 
(7)  Driveways serving single-family and duplex residences may be no less than 15' wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of the curb or edge of pavement of the roadway of no less than 5'. 
(8)  Multiple family residential driveways and drives serving all nonresidential land uses shall be designed and arranged to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on all streets. 
(9)  In non-residential developments, interparcel access shall be required to facilitate movement between and among parcels adjoining a state or county road, to improve overall safety. However, when the natural grade along a common property line exceeds 15% throughout its length, such access shall be at the option of the property owners. 
(10)  Driveways and access ways for multi-family, office, commercial, and industrial developments are prohibited from accessing single-family residential streets unless approved by the engineer. 
(11)  When an existing or proposed commercial or industrial lot has frontage on more than one street and the nature of the business requires as a necessary accompaniment the use of vehicles over six wheels, the use of said vehicles over six wheels may be prohibited from using the lower functional streets. If the use of vehicles over six wheels on the lower functional streets contributes to and increases traffic flow on said lower functional streets, the engineer may require the existing commercial or industrial business to provide an additional driveway cut(s) so as to lighten, lessen, or relieve the use and flow of vehicles over six wheels on said lower functional streets. 
(e)  Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed by the subdivider for all developments having more than 24 lots. All street light installation and maintenance shall be in accordance with this subsection. 
(1)  Intention. It is the intention of this subsection (e) to encourage good lighting practices to conserve energy, to minimize glare, to protect the use and enjoyment of surrounding property, and to increasing nighttime safety, utility, security and productivity. It is not the objective to illuminate adjoining private property. 
(2)  At the time of and as a requirement of submission of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall: 
a.  Present a proposed streetlight layout that details the proposed streetlight service for the development with the conceptual plan or preliminary plat of the development, whichever shall first occur. The proposal shall meet all design standards set forth herein. All fixtures and standards/poles installed or to be used shall be approved by the county and the utility providing electrical service to the streetlights. All such fixtures shall meet IES standards. Should the engineer disapprove the streetlight layout, the grounds for disapproval shall be communicated in writing to the developer. Any such disapproval by the engineer may be appealed to the director under section 86-105 of this chapter. 
b.  Street lights shall have a high pressure "sodium" with a maximum of 10,000 lumen, unless a larger size lamp is needed for highway safety purposes and/or road intersections, as determined by the engineer. 
c.  Spacing between the lights will vary from 250 feet to 500 feet, or approximately every other utility pole. 
d.  The engineer shall not approve a final plat unless the subdivider submits proof of final payment to the utility company for construction and installation of the streetlights in the district, or a portion thereof where the development is phased. 
(3)  Lights in or near public right-of-way. All lighting fixtures within or near the public rights-of-way shall be installed and operated in such a manner so as to prevent interference with the normal use of the public rights-of-way in any manner, including glare, location of blinds, and other such means of potential interference. The approval of the engineer shall be necessary before any person shall be authorized to install a security light or other such lighting fixture within the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Special tax district. Where streetlights are required by this subsection (e), the subdivider shall apply to the county to establish a special tax districts for the provision of services of streetlight services within the development. The application for a special tax jurisdiction shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with the special tax district ordinance. The subdivider must receive the approval and designation of a special tax district prior to final plat approval. 
(f)  Greenspace. Greenspace shall be constructed, installed, and improved to meet the standards of the director and those customarily used and applied. Greenspace shall be subject to the following minimum standards. 
(1)  Minimum width. For accessibility, the width of any greenspace tract should be, at minimum, sufficient to accommodate a path, given the existing terrain, the center of which is at least 20 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Pedestrian and multi-purpose paths. Greenspaces should provide for pedestrian and/or multi-use paths, not less than eight feet wide. Motorized vehicles should not be permitted on trail systems except for maintenance, construction, or public safety purposes. Where appropriate and convenient, such pedestrian and multi-purpose paths should be made handicapped accessible. 
(3)  Path/street crossings. Where greenspace path systems cross and internal subdivision street, the access points should be directly across from each other, clearly identified both to the motorist and pedestrian, and located with appropriate sight distance as determined by the engineer. Where a path crosses any county road, the path should be grade separated (i.e., by tunnel or bridge), or located at a traffic control device and approved by the engineer and director. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-126. - Dams. 
(a)  Any land disturbing activity that involves a property that is proposed to contain a dam shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
(1)  New dams which become subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, which are proposed to be 25' or more in height or proposed to have an impounding capacity of 100 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation or otherwise defined by the Georgia Safe Dams Act shall be subject to the following: 
If a developer proposes the construction of any new dam where development exists within the proposed breach zone, the new dam shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety adopted by the state department of natural resources. The developer shall obtain necessary approvals and permits from the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources for the project and the dam prior to securing a land disturbance permit from the department. If no development exists within the proposed breach zone, the developer shall submit four copies of the construction plans to the department for review prior to securing a land disturbance permit. 
(2)  If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules of Dam Safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. If, however, development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety. 
(3)  If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then four copies of a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted along with four copies of the construction plans for review prior to securing a land disturbance permit from the department. The design engineer shall utilize the computer model entitled "DAMBRK" or approved equivalent thereof for the dam breach analysis. 
(4)  Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach easement: 
a.  Agriculture that requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads. 
b.  Fences. 
c.  Outdoor advertising signs provided the signs meet the minimum requirements as specified under the county sign ordinance (chapter 78). 
d.  Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
e.  Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar facilities and structures. 
(5)  For any new dam proposed that does not to meet the design for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. 
(6)  The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. 
(7)  Prior to recording of a final plat or at completion of a building foundation, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a registered professional engineer shall be submitted to the department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. 
(8)  The dam owner(s) shall provide the name and address of the person or persons owning the dam, the person having direct responsibility for the operation of the dam, and a plan for inspection and maintenance to be put into effect by the owner(s) or operator of the dam. 
(b)  Quality assurance plan. Because of the safe dams program, when an existing category II dam is reclassified to a category I dam because of proposed development downstream of the dam, the developer shall provide for review to the state the following information: 
(1)  Location of the category II dam and the proposed development; and 
(2)  A surveyed cross-section as required by the Georgia Safe Dams Act of the stream valley at the location of the proposed development including proposed finished floor elevations; and 
(3)  A dam breach analysis using the dambreak computer model to establish the height of the floodwave in the downstream floodplain. The dambreak modeling shall be completed in accordance with the safe dams program quality assurance program by a qualified registered engineer. 
(4)  Inventory information regarding the category II dams within the county may be obtained through the Georgia Safe Dams Program. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-127—86-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR GREENSPACE LANDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, § 1, amended the title of art. VIII to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 

Sec. 86-141. - Applicability. 
Where the standards set forth in this article do not address a particular question or issue, the standards set forth in article VII and other provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-142. - General design standards. 
All greenspace lands design shall avoid or minimize adverse impacts on the county's natural, cultural and historic resources, as defined below. 
(1)  Groundwater resources. All greenspace lands shall be designed to cause the least practicable disturbance to natural infiltration and percolation of precipitation to the groundwater table. The subdivider shall use vegetation, minimize land disturbance activities, and construct and install streets, buildings, and other impervious surfaces in locations other than those identified on the greenspace plan as having the greatest permeability where precipitation is most likely to infiltrate and recharge the groundwater. 
(2)  Stream, swales, springs, and other lowland areas. The greenspace plan describes streams, including stream channels and flood plains, swales, springs and other lowland areas as resources that warrant restrictive land use controls because of flooding hazards to human life and property, ground water recharge functions, water quality and aquatic community health, and wildlife habitat. 
a.  The following activities shall be minimized: 
1.  Disturbance to streams and drainage swales. 
2.  Disturbance to year-round wetlands, areas with seasonally high water tables, and areas of surface water concentration. 
3.  Streams, swales and other lowland areas warrant designation as greenspace lands. Lands adjoining streams, swales and other lowland areas function as a buffer and should be included in the greenspace. 
(3)  Woodlands. Woodlands occur extensively throughout the county, often in association with streams and wet areas, poor and erodible agricultural soils, and moderate to steep slopes. 
a.  Woodland conditions vary with respect to species composition, age, stocking, and health. Woodlands range from relatively recent post-agricultural young stands to mature mixed-age forests. Most woodlands represent one or more of the following resource values: 
1.  As soil stabilizers, particularly on moderate to steep slopes, thereby controlling erosion into nearby streams, ponds, impoundments and roads. A closely related function is their enhancement of ground water recharge. 
2.  As a means of ameliorating harsh microclimatic conditions, in both summer and winter. 
3.  As habitats for woodland birds, mammals and other wildlife. 
4.  As recreation resources for walkers, equestrians, picnickers and other related outdoor activities. 
5.  As visual buffers between areas of development and adjacent roads and properties. 
b.  Woodlands on any tract proposed for greenspace lands shall be evaluated by the subdivider to determine the extent to which such woodlands should be designated partly or entirely as greenspace lands. Evaluation criteria shall include: 
1.  Configuration and size. 
2.  Present conditions (i.e., stocking, health, and species composition). 
3.  Site potential (i.e., the site's capabilities to support woodlands), based upon its topographic, soil and hydrologic characteristics. 
4.  Ecological functions (i.e., in protecting steep slopes, erodible soils, maintaining stream quality and providing for wildlife habitats). 
5.  Relationship to woodlands on adjoining and nearby properties and the potential for maintaining continuous woodland areas. 
c.  The evaluation of the tract's woodlands for greenspace lands shall be undertaken by a forester, landscape architect, horticulturist, arborist, or another qualified professional acceptable to the director. This evaluation shall be submitted as a report and made a part of the application for a preliminary plat. At a minimum, that report shall include one or more maps indicating boundaries and conditions of woodland areas accompanied by a report addressing the criteria in subsection 86-142(3)a above. 
d.  In designing greenspace plan for any tract, the subdivider shall be guided by the following standards: 
1.  Healthy woodlands exceeding one acre shall be preserved and designated as greenspace areas, to the maximum extent possible. Proposed site improvements shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize the loss or degradation of woodland areas. 
2.  Greenspace lands shall be designed to preserve woodlands along roadways, property lines and lines occurring within a site such as streams, swales, hedgerows, and other natural boundaries. Such lines and the native vegetation associated with them shall be preserved as buffers between adjacent properties and between areas being subdivided within a property. Preservation shall include ground, shrub, understory, and canopy vegetation. 
3.  Disturbance or removal of woodlands occupying environmentally sensitive areas shall be undertaken only when recommended by a qualified profession set forth in paragraph 86-142(3)c, and on a limited, selective basis to minimize the adverse impacts of such actions. This shall include but not necessarily be limited to, vegetation performing important soil stabilizing functions on wet soils, stream banks and sloping lands. 
4.  No clearing or earth disturbance (except for soil analysis for proposed community wastewater system shall be permitted on a site before the preliminary plat approval, and if applicable, development agreements. 
(4)  Rural-agricultural areas. An area comprising fields, pastures, meadows, and former agricultural areas in early stages of woodlands succession, with fences, and hedgerows, typically bordered by streams, draws, and woodlands. The rural-agricultural areas comprise the County's natural and historic resources, the rural landscape, pastoral family houses, barns and other structures. The rural-agricultural areas provide habitat for wildlife, in conjunction with nearby woodlands and streams. 
a.  Several elements of these working landscapes lend themselves to incorporation into the county's greenspace network. These include prime agricultural soils and natural features that visually punctuate the landscape, such as hedgerows, rock outcrops, and visually prominent places such as knolls and hilltops. 
b.  The rural-agricultural areas can accommodate development, with preferred locations being the non-prime agricultural soils and lower topographic settings where development will be visually less obtrusive. Compact clustered residential designs, with coordinated architectural and landscape architectural themes, are encouraged in highly visible locations where future development cannot be avoided (such as at the far edge of open fields). 
(5)  Slopes. Moderately sloping lands (15 to 25 percent) and steeply sloping lands (over 25 percent) are prone to severe erosion if disturbed. Erosion and the resulting overland flow of soil sediments into streams, ponds and public roads, are detrimental to water quality and aquatic life, and a potential hazard to public safety. 
a.  Areas of steep slope shall be preserved in accordance with the conservation overlay district of the zoning resolution and as required below. 
b.  All grading and earthmoving on slopes exceeding 15 percent shall be minimized. 
c.  No site disturbance shall be allowed on slopes exceeding 25 percent except grading for a portion of a driveway accessing a single family dwelling when it can be demonstrated that no other routing which avoids slopes exceeding 25 percent is feasible. 
d.  On slopes of 15 to 25 percent, the only permitted grading, not otherwise prohibited by this paragraph, shall be to site a single family dwelling, its access driveway, and the wastewater conveyance system. 
e.  Grading on all sloping lands of 15 percent or greater shall not result in earth cuts or fills whose highest vertical dimension exceeds six feet, except where in the discretion of the director, no reasonable alternatives exist for construction of roads, drainage structures and other public improvements, in which case such vertical dimensions shall not exceed 12 ft. Roads and driveways shall follow the line of existing topography to minimize the required cut and fill. Finished slopes of all cuts and fills shall be as required to minimize disturbance of natural grades. 
(6)  Significant natural areas and features. Natural areas containing rare or endangered plants and animals, as well as other features of natural significance exist throughout the county. The subdivider shall take all reasonable measures to protect significant natural areas identified by the subdivider's conservation plan by incorporating them into proposed greenspace areas or avoiding their disturbance in areas proposed for development. 
(7)  Historic structures and sites. The subdivider shall design to protect existing historic resources. The protection of an existing historic resource shall include the conservation of the landscape immediately associated with and significant to that resource, to preserve its historic context. Where, in the discretion of the director, a development will have an impact upon an historic resource, the developer shall mitigate that impact to the satisfaction of the director by modifying the design, relocating proposed lot lines, providing landscape buffers, or other approved means. 
(8)  Historic rural road corridors and scenic viewsheds. The subdivider shall attempt to preserve the scenic visual corridors along such roads by incorporating them into greenspace areas or otherwise providing for building setbacks and architectural designs to minimize their intrusion. In instances, where such designs fail to satisfactorily protect corridors, subdividers shall be required to provide naturalistic landscape buffers to minimize their adverse visual impacts. The species specified for such buffers shall be selected on the basis of an inventory of tree and shrub species found in existing hedgerows and along wooded roadside edges in the vicinity of the development proposal. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02) 
Sec. 86-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 86-143 in its entirety. Former § 86-143 pertained to the design process for conservation subdivisions, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 
Sec. 86-144. - Greenspace design review standards. 
(a)  Prioritized list of resources to be conserved. The design of greenspace lands in any greenspace plan shall reflect the standards set forth in section 86-142, and, to the fullest extent possible, incorporate any of the following resources if they occur on the tract (listed in order of significance): 
(1)  Stream channels, floodplains, wet soils, swales, springs and other lowland areas, including adjacent buffer areas which may be required to insure their protection. 
(2)  Significant natural areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern, such as those listed in the statewide natural diversity inventory. 
(3)  Moderate to steep slopes, particularly those adjoining water courses and ponds, where disturbance and resulting soil erosion and sedimentation could be detrimental to water quality. 
(4)  Healthy woodlands, including specimen trees, particularly those performing important ecological functions such as soil stabilization and protection of streams, wetlands and wildlife habitats. 
(5)  Areas where precipitation is most likely to recharge local groundwater resources because of topographic and soil conditions affording high rates of infiltration and percolation. 
(6)  Hedgerows, groups of trees, large individual trees of botanic significance, and other vegetational features representing the site's rural past. 
(7)  Class I, II and III agricultural soils as defined by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(8)  Historic structures and sites. 
(9)  Visually prominent topographic features such as knolls, hilltops and ridges, and scenic viewsheds as seen from public roads (particularly those with historic features). 
(10)  Existing trails connecting the tract to other locations in the county. 
(b)  Other design considerations. The configuration of proposed greenspace lands set aside for common use in residential subdivisions shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  They shall be free of all structures except historic buildings and structures related to greenspace uses. The director may grant approval of structures and improvements required for storm drainage, sewage treatment and water supply within the greenspace provided that such facilities would not be detrimental to the greenspace (and that the acreage of lands required for such uses is not credited towards minimum greenspace acreage requirements for the tract, unless the land they occupy is appropriate for passive recreational use). 
(2)  They shall generally not include parcels smaller than three acres, have a length-to-width ratio of less than 4:1, or be less than 75 feet in width, except for such lands specifically designed as neighborhood greens, playing fields or trail links. 
(3)  They shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe and convenient pedestrian access to greenspace land. 
(4)  They shall be suitable for active recreational uses to the extent deemed necessary by the governing body, without interfering with adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways, and roads. 
(5)  They shall be interconnected wherever possible to provide a continuous network of greenspace lands within and adjoining the subdivision. 
(6)  They shall provide buffers to adjoining parks, preserves or other protected lands. 
(7)  Greenspace shall provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the residents of the subdivision. Consideration shall be given to providing for public access on such trails if they are linked to other publicly-accessible pathway systems within the county. Provisions should be made for access to the greenspace lands, as required for land management and emergency purposes. 
(8)  They shall be undivided by public or private streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation. 
(9)  They shall be suitably landscaped either by retaining existing natural cover and wooded areas and/or according to a landscaping plan to protect greenspace resources. 
(10)  They shall be made subject to such agreement with the county and such conservation easements duly recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds as may be required by the governing body for the purpose of preserving the common greenspace for such uses. 
(11)  They shall be consistent with the county's comprehensive plan and its greenspace plan. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02) 
Sec. 86-145. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 86-145 in its entirety. Former § 86-145 pertained to housing location standards for conservation subdivisions, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 
Sec. 86-146. - Trails. 
(a)  When a greenspace plan proposal is traversed by or abuts an existing trail customarily used by pedestrians and/or equestrians, the director may require the subdivider to make provisions for continued recreational use of the trail. 
(b)  Trails shall be designed pursuant to the guidelines set forth in Appendix "K". 
(c)  The subdivider may alter the course of the trail within the tract to be developed under the following conditions: 
(1)  The points at which the trail enters and exits the tract remain unchanged. 
(2)  The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according to generally accepted principles of landscape architecture. 
(3)  The proposed alteration does not coincide with a paved road intended for use by motorized vehicles. 
(d)  When trails are intended for public or private use, they shall be protected by a permanent conservation easement on the properties on which they are located. The width of the protected area in which the trail is located should be a minimum of ten feet. The language of the conservation easement shall be to the satisfaction of the director upon recommendation of the county attorney. 
(e)  The land area permanently designated for trails for public use may be credited toward the greenspace land requirement. 
(f)  A subdivider may propose and develop a new trail. If said trail is available for use by the general public and connects with an existing trail, the land area protected for said trail may be credited toward the greenspace requirement. 
(g)  Trail improvements shall demonstrate adherence to principles of quality trail design. 
(h)  Trails shall have a vertical clearance of no less than ten feet. 
(i)  Width of the trail surface may vary depending upon type of use to be accommodated, but in no case shall be less than three feet or greater than eight feet. 
(j)  No trail shall be designed with the intent to accommodate motorized vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 86-147. - Stewardship plan for woodlands management. 
(a)  Intention. The intention of this section is to provide regulations for forest management within greenspace lands and provide guidelines for design to defend against wildfire. All greenspace lands having more than ten acres of greenspace lands shall be required to submit a stewardship plan for woodlands management. Greenspace lands having less than ten acres of greenspace lands may be required to submit a stewardship plan for woodlands management. 
(b)  Required submissions. At the time of and as a requirement of submission of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit: 
(1)  Stewardship plan. The plan should be based upon an ecosystem-based management approach whenever possible and/or upon the objectives of the county to include wildfire protection of threatened communities in the wildland/urban interface. The forest stewardship guidelines will be followed for the objectives of timber production, wildlife habitat, aesthetics, recreation, conservation or equal emphasis on all of the objectives mentioned, insofar as the size of the land area will allow such management objectives to be realistic options. The Stewardship designation (for properties that qualify) will be an objective of the management plan. Registered or consulting foresters shall provide technical assistance in all phases of forest management and prepare a natural resource management plan. The stewardship plan shall meet all design standards set forth in appendix L. 
(2)  The trail system shall be constructed according to the standards in section 86-146. 
(3)  The staff shall not approve a final plat unless the subdivider has completed final improvements according to subsection 86-26(d). 
(4)  Special tax district. The subdivider may apply to the county to establish a special tax districts for the provision of woodlands stewardship services and maintenance services for the greenspace within the development. The application for a special tax jurisdiction shall be reviewed and considered as a park facility according with the special tax district ordinance. If the subdivider applies for a special tax jurisdiction for a park facility, the approval and designation of a special tax district must be received prior to final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02, § 1) 
Sec. 86-148. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, amended the Code by repealing former § 86-148 in its entirety. Former § 86-148 pertained to streets and streetscape design, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 
Sec. 86-149. - Ownership options. 
The following methods may be used, either individually or in combination, to own greenspace lands shall not be transferred to another entity except for transfer to another method of ownership permitted under this section, and then only when there is no change in the greenspace lands or in the greenspace ratio of the overall development. Ownership methods shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Fee simple dedication to the county. The county may, but shall not be required to, accept any portion of the greenspace lands, provided that: 
a.  There is no cost of acquisition to the county; and, 
b.  The subdivider shall construct initial improvements. 
c.  The county agrees to and has access to maintain such facilities. 
d.  The subdivider shall apply for a special tax district designation to maintain greenspace as park facility. 
(2)  Homeowners' association. Greenspace lands may be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association, subject to all of the provisions for homeowners' associations set forth in state regulations and statutes. In addition, the following regulations shall be met: 
a.  The applicant shall provide the county a description of the organization of the proposed association, including its by-laws, and all documents governing ownership, maintenance, and use restrictions for greenspace lands; 
b.  The proposed association shall be established by the owner or applicant and shall be operating (with financial subsidization by the owner or applicant, if necessary) before the sale of any dwelling units in the development; 
c.  Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of dwelling units therein and their successors in title; 
d.  The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance of greenspace lands; 
e.  The by-laws shall confer legal authority on the association to place a lien on the real property of any member who falls delinquent is his dues. Such dues shall be paid with the accrued interest before the lien may be lifted: 
1.  The greenspace shall be permanently restricted from future development through a conservation easement, conservation organization is acceptable to the county and is a bona fide conservation organization intended to exist indefinitely; 
2.  The conveyance shall contain appropriate provisions for proper reverter or retransfer to a qualified non-profit organization (land trust) in the event that the association becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions. The form of the conveyance shall be subject to approval by the county attorney. 
f.  A maintenance bond for the maintenance and operation of the greenspace shall be required. 
g.  Written notice of the assumption of maintenance for greenspace lands must be given to all members of the association no less than 30 days prior to such event; and 
h.  The association shall have adequate staff to administer, maintain, and operate such greenspace lands. 
(3)  Nonprofit statuts. A conservation entity is a qualified nonprofit organization. An owner may transfer either fee simple title of the greenspace or easements on the greenspace to a private nonprofit conservation organization or to the county provided that: 
a.  The conservation organization is acceptable to the county and is a bona fide conservation organization intended to exist indefinitely; 
b.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization or the county becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; 
c.  The greenspace land is permanently restricted from future development through a conservation easement and the county is given the ability to enforce these restrictions; and 
d.  A maintenance agreement acceptable to the county is established between the owner and the organization or the county. 
(4)  Dedication of easements to the county. The board of commissioners may, but shall not be required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of the greenspace lands or facilities. In such cases, the facility remains in the ownership of the condominium association, homeowners' association, or private conservation organization while the easements are held by the county. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  There shall be no cost of acquisition to the county; 
b.  Any such easements for public use shall be accessible to the residents of the county; and 
c.  The owner shall apply for the development as a special tax jurisdiction designation for the greenspace as a park facility. 
d.  All initial improvements to greenspace shall be completed by the subdivider. 
(5)  Accessibility and ownership. Greenspace lands shall be accessible to all property owners within the subdivision. No greenspace lands shall not be included as a part of any lot and no property owner within the development shall hold title to any greenspace lands unless through an approved homeowners association, which permanently protects the greenspace lands. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-150. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Unless the greenspace is accepted by the board of commissioners as a special tax district for a park facility, the cost and responsibility of maintaining greenspace land shall be borne by the property owner or homeowners' association, or conservation entity. 
(b)  The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plan submission, provide a plan for maintenance of greenspace lands and operation of greenspace lands (see section 86-147, stewardship plan for woodlands management) in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  The plan shall define ownership; 
(2)  The plan shall establish necessary regular and periodic operation and maintenance responsibilities for the various kinds of greenspace (i.e. lawns, playing fields, meadow, pasture, cropland, woodlands, etc.) according to the greenspace design regulations in the subdivision ordinance; 
(3)  The plan shall estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and associated costs, and define the means for funding the maintenance of the greenspace land and operation of any greenspace land on an on-going basis. Such funding plan shall include the means for funding long-term capital improvements as well as regular yearly operating and maintenance costs; 
(4)  At the county's discretion, the applicant may be required to escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation costs of greenspace land for up to five years; and, 
(5)  Any changes to the maintenance plan shall be approved by the director. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-151—86-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 86-161. - Generally. 
Every subdivider at his own expense shall be required to install, or at his own expense to have installed by the appropriate public utility the following improvements: 
(1)  Streets and related improvements. 
a.  Street grading. All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to the standards of the county. These standards and other standards of the county referred to in these regulations are on file in the offices of the public works department, the county water authority, the environmental health department, the soil conservation service, and the community development department. 
b.  Street paving. 
1.  Roadways, constructed in each subdivision or used as a required subdivision entrance, shall be paved according to the standards adopted by the county in place at the time the subdivision is built. 
2.  Street paving widths shall be in conformance with standards set forth in article V. 
c.  Curbs and gutters. 
1.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all new subdivision streets in accordance with standards adopted by the county. 
2.  Curbs and gutters shall be two in width and of rollback or L-back construction. 
3.  Design and installation of curbs and gutters shall be in accordance with the public works department standards. 
d.  Street trees. Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. 
(2)  Project access improvements. When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed county road that is to be developed or redeveloped as a single family residential or duplex subdivision, multi-family or nonresidential development and the county road will provide access to the property, the following access improvements to the county road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer as required: 
a.  A deceleration lane shall be required at each project driveway or subdivision street entrance, which provides street access. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer desires to construct a median break to serve the development, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required by the developer and shall meet the latest standards of the county. 
b.  Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 75 to 200 feet, with an additional 50-foot taper length, a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provided with curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the county at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration lane shall also be required. 
c.  Other project access improvements may be required by the county in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public. 
d.  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures, as may be occasioned by the required project access improvements. 
e.  If the project driveway referred to in subsections (2)a. and b. above is to be used exclusively for one-single family residence and is not part of a larger development, the director may, in his discretion, waive the requirement for a deceleration lane where all sight distance requirements herein and other safety concerns are satisfied. 
(3)  Water supply. 
a.  If, in the opinion of the county water authority, an adequate public water supply is within 1,000 feet of the subdivision, the subdivider shall install or have installed a system of water mains and connections to each lot which shall be in accordance with adopted standards of the county water authority. 
b.  Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the Environmental health department, if such system consists of separate wells located on and serving individual lots; and any other non-public water supply system shall be approved by the county water authority and the department of natural resources EPD drinking water division. 
(4)  Sanitary sewage disposal. 
(5)  Storm drainage. Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities such as drains, sewers, catch basins, culverts, detention areas, and other facilities as provided in article VII. 
(6)  Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established: 
a.  Where plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines. 
b.  Permanent bench markers shall be placed at all land lot corners on the property being developed. These markers shall be concrete with brass marking. Placement (to be verified by the department's visual inspection) shall extend no less than six inches above the finished grade. 
c.  All corners shall be marked with an iron rebar or pin, at least ½ inches in diameter and 18 inches long driven so as to extend no less than one inch above finished grade. 
d.  The accurate location, material, and size of all existing monuments shall be shown on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
(7)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants are required in compliance with the following development standards: 
a.  Minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants. 
1.  In single-family residential subdivisions sufficient size water mains shall be installed to provide adequate flow in accordance with the current edition of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code in its entirety, including any applicable appendices. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed 500 feet. Three-way fire hydrants shall be used. 
2.  For multi-family residential dwellings or multi-family apartment complexes, industrial or commercial areas, to include motels, hotels, nursing homes, hospitals, education buildings, all office buildings and churches, sufficient size water mains shall be installed to provide adequate flow in accordance with the current edition of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as adopted by the state, in its entirety including all applicable appendices. The fire chief may require larger mains and flows if the fire chief determines that the minimum standards will not adequately serve the use and occupancy of the structure(s). Fire hydrants shall be three-way hydrants and shall be spaced not to exceed 400 feet with additional hydrants located as necessary to permit all portions of buildings and combustible storage to be reached by hose lays of not more than 400 feet. Fire hydrant locations shall be approved by the fire chief or the chief's designee to allow firefighting equipment to be placed within 15 feet of said hydrants. 
3.  In mobile home parks and multifamily residential complexes, sufficient size water mains shall be installed to provide adequate flow in accordance with the current edition of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as adopted by the state, in its entirety including all applicable appendices. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed 500 feet. Three-way fire hydrants shall be used. 
4.  Prior to any preliminary plat being approved by the engineer, the fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall review, and if the standards are satisfied he will approve, the spacing of the fire hydrants, main size and water flows. 
b.  Installation. 
1.  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed and shall be under water pressure and ready for firefighting before any sheeting may be installed on walls and roofs of buildings other than fire-resistant construction. 
2.  All fire hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the appropriate water provider or supplier and the fire department. Fire department connections shall not be less than 18 inches or more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The threads of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. 
3.  Fire hydrants shall meet the requirements of NFPA Standard 24, fire hydrants for outside protection, and shall have not less than six-inch connections with the mains. The number, size, and arrangement of the outlets, the size of the main valve opening and the size of the barrel shall be suitable for protection to be provided and shall be approved by the appropriate water provider having jurisdiction and the fire department. Fire hydrants shall be placed no closer than 50 feet from the nearest building to be protected, except when approved otherwise by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee. 
4.  The size and shape of the operation nut, as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates, shall be established by the fire chief or his designee and be uniform with hydrants in the county water distribution system. 
c.  Private fire mains and hydrants. 
1.  Water mains on private property for fire protection purposes shall be designed and installed in accordance with public mains. Size of mains and water flows shall be adequate for the protection of the property served by said mains and in accordance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as adopted by the state, in its entirety including all applicable appendices. Hydrants shall meet local governing specifications and be located as required by the fire chief or the chief's designee. 
2.  Prior to installation, two sets of hydraulically engineered detailed plans, bearing a state-licensed sprinkler contractor's seal, shall be submitted to the fire department for approval. Before covering any installation, the fire chief or the chief's designee will perform an inspection to assure compliance with local governing authority requirements. 
d.  Effective January 1, 2006, the minimum fire flow for all buildings other than one- or two-family dwellings will be specified in Table B105.1 of the International Fire Code. A reduction in the required fire flow rate to a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute may be allowed where the building or structure is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with chapter 9 of the International Fire Code. This subsection shall be in full force and effect until December 31, 2010, at which time it shall expire and be repealed in its entirety. 
(8)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks are optional improvements, but if installed, they must be built to the following standards: 
a.  Construction shall be four inches thick and 3,000-lb. mix concrete. 
b.  Compactions shall be a minimum of 95 percent. 
c.  Width of sidewalk may vary from four feet to six feet. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be so located that there will be a minimum of two feet of width between the outside edge of the curve and the leading edge of the sidewalk. There will be a minimum of a two inches fall in elevation from the outside edge of the curve to the back of the sidewalk, or vice versa, depending on drain slope. 
e.  All sidewalks and curb ramps at intersections shall meet the current rules and regulations established by the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(9)  Removal of debris. To protect and preserve potential building sites, areas suitable for the installation of wells, septic tanks, and drain fields, and for other purposes, all stumps and other tree parts, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed from the subdivision site and disposed of in accordance with law. No tree stumps, or other portions of tree trucks or limbs shall be buried or burned anywhere in the development, except in accordance with county regulations. All dead or dying trees standing or fallen shall be removed from the site. 
a.  The department may approve exceptions to this prohibition on the burying or burning of debris provided that a specific plan and procedure for the burying or burning of debris are presented by the developer, approved by the department, and strictly adhered to by the developer. 
b.  The location(s) of any burial pits utilized on the site shall be identified on the final plat, and the accuracy of such identified locations shall be certified by the developer, rather than by the developer's engineer. 
(10)  Traffic control devices. Street name signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided by the subdivider through payment of specified fees to the public works department, or required signs and devices shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the requirements of, and subject to final approval by the public works department and subject to the following standards. 
a.  Signs. 
1.  Street name signs and stop signs shall be installed at all intersections within a development. All intersections shall contain a minimum of two street name signs and stop signs as appropriate for the intersection. Street name signs shall have a six-inch green background with four-inch white legends. Signs shall be mounted on three-lb., 12-foot green U-channel posts. The installation of other styles of signs must be pre-approved by the director. 
2.  A "speed limit" sign shall be posted at each development entrance. Speed limits shall be set by the county or the state DOT. 
3.  A "Watch for Children" sign shall be posted at each subdivision entrance. 
4.  All required permanent signs shall be installed by the subdivider at no cost to the county. The subdivider shall install all street signs and traffic control devices prior to final plat approval. 
5.  The subdivider shall furnish and install all traffic control devices and street name signs prior to final plat approval. 
b.  Obstructing visibility at intersections. In accordance with subsection 86-125(c). 
c.  Procedure to be followed. The procedure to be followed by the subdivider in achieving compliance with these requirements shall be as directed by, and at the option of, the county. 
d.  Completion required prior to final plat. The installation/placement of all required permanent signs and traffic control devices shall be completed prior to final plat approval and/or the issuance of any building permit for any development within the subdivision. 
e.  Decorative signs allowable. The director, in his discretion, may allow decorative signs within a subdivision to the extent that state laws do not conflict placement thereof. Color, texture, and size shall be determined by the director. If a decorative sign and post installation is desired by the subdivider and approved by the county, the subdivider or homeowner's association shall be responsible for the installation and perpetual maintenance thereof. Failure to comply with maintenance requirements will result in the public works department taking over such maintenance with the installation of standard signs and post. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Res./Ord. of 10-21-03(2), § 1; Res./Ord. of 12-20-05) 
Secs. 86-162—86-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - STORMWATER DETENTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 86-170. - Compliance. 
Any submission for preliminary review and development application on or after September 3, 2014 shall comply with all applicable county ordinances pertaining to phase II municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) general permit GAG610000 and Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for the permitted area of the county. 
(Ord. of 1-6-15, § 1) 
Sec. 86-171. - Site grading—General requirements. 
All design, construction, and installation of streets and stormwater conveyance facilities are subject to the standards of the public works department and approval of the public works department. 
(1)  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved construction plans. 
(2)  Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent in all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 85 percent. 
(3)  The maximum slopes for cut or fill shall be 2:1 (two feet of horizontal run for each foot of rise or fall). The depth of cut referred to herein shall be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope of cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill except when the engineer approves benching. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, the slope may be steeper if pre-splitting is employed and upon submission of a geotechnical report which substantiates the integrity of the rock in the steeper condition, subject to the review and approval of the engineer. 
(4)  While most soils in the area can be safely stabilized at a 2:1 slope, some soils exhibit a low shearing resistance and a low cohesiveness. These soils typically are micaceous silts and sandy soils with little or no clay. If the 2:1 slope shows evidence of shearing, non-cohesiveness, sliding, or inability to maintain compaction, the slope shall be stabilized at 3:1 or by using such mechanical methods as needed (such as retaining walls or "grow mats" stapled in place) to maintain slope, height and integrity. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-15, § 1) 
Sec. 86-172. - Stormwater detention. 
(a)  Stormwater management report required. 
(1)  Every project shall provide a stormwater management report prepared by professional engineer currently registered in the state. The purpose of this report shall be to formulate a plan to manage stormwater runoff so that stormwater runoff hazards are not created and existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the property being developed. 
(2)  The stormwater management report shall include a written narrative and shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. The report shall include a detailed summary statement of the increase or decrease in flow or runoff on adjacent properties and downstream drainageways. It shall contain drainage area delineation maps and other exhibits at satisfactory scale and sufficient in quantity and slope to define the boundaries of the site relative to watercourses, drainage divides, drainage structures, and other pertinent features. 
(3)  The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway "immediately" downstream from the project. This area shall generally extend a flow distance of about one-half mile from the project's boundary line, but shall be longer for projects contributing relatively large amounts of runoff to the study area, and shorter for small runoff contributions. In all cases, the most critical downstream area investigation shall be conducted relative to existing and anticipated land use on tracts that adjoin the project site. 
(b)  Stormwater detention required. 
(1)  If the stormwater management report indicates that adverse stormwater runoff is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be required to provide stormwater detention facilities. These detention facilities shall be designed so that their peak release rates, when combined with those of all detention bypass areas in the same basin, produce peak flow rates and flow velocities at the site's boundary line no greater than those which occurred at the same location for pre-developed conditions. 
(2)  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the engineer preparing the stormwater management report, and in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site: 
a.  Existing land uses downstream. 
b.  Anticipated future land uses downstream. 
c.  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development. 
d.  Presence of existing drainage problems. 
e.  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems. 
f.  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously. 
g.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities. 
h.  Existing flows generated off-site that pass through the project site. 
i.  Anticipated future flows generated off-site that pass through the project site. 
j.  The nature of the receiving watercourse. 
(3)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be required for any portion of any site for which development activities will result in increased flows, unless the registered professional engineer currently registered in the state certifies and provides documentation supporting the conclusion to the engineer that the following is true and correct as applicable: 
a.  The nondetained, postdevelopment runoff will leave the project site as sheet flow, and will not have an adverse impact upon downstream properties. 
b.  The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred under pre-developed conditions, and any impact of increase sheet flows upon downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result from the concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were employed. 
c.  The runoff will flow directly into a floodplain without crossing off-site properties, and the runoff will constitute less than five percent of the total runoff in the watercourse at the point where the watercourse crosses the project site's downstream property line. 
d.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility that has been designed to manage the additional upstream property's runoff. 
(c)  Detention design criteria—General. 
(1)  All stormwater detention design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the state. 
(2)  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the peak flow rates associated with storms having two-, ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year return frequencies. 
(3)  A variety of methods of achieving stormwater management goals shall be acceptable in providing detention facilities. The type of facility provided shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  The type of development for which the detention facility is being provided. 
b.  The type of development which the detention facility is intended to protect. 
c.  Volume of stormwater to be stored. 
d.  Origin and magnitude of the flows to be managed. 
e.  Topographic opportunities and limitations. 
f.  Safety considerations. 
g.  Maintenance requirements. 
h.  Aesthetic considerations. 
i.  Likelihood of facility operation interfering with access to public or private facilities. 
j.  Proximity of facility to property lines, utilities, buffers, etc. 
k.  Similar site-specific constraints. 
(4)  Detention facilities may be of any of the following types, and two or more types may be used in combination with one another: 
a.  Normally-dry basins, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods. 
b.  Lakes and ponds, whether excavated or created by damming a natural drainage feature, or a combination of both methods. 
c.  Other types of facilities shall be approved by the community development department. 
(5)  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
(6)  The detention methodology required for any given project shall conform to standard engineering practices. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to use the correct coefficients and applications that will result in compliance with the requirements of this article and the intent of these regulations. 
(7)  Runoff coefficients used for pre-and post-development conditions for the rational methods shall be consistent with standard engineering practices. For the SCS method the runoff curve numbers found in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" shall be used. For any stormwater analysis, the composite "C" (rational method) or CN (SCS method) used for predeveloped conditions shall not exceed 0.3 or 66, respectively, unless prior approval has been obtained through the department. 
(8)  If either the rational method or the SCS method is used for detention design, calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were computed, both for pre- and postdevelopment conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. 
(9)  If a computer program is used for detention design, including generation and routing hydrographs, the output from the program shall be summarized in the stormwater management report, and the name and version of the program shall be indicated. Computer output sheets may be attached to the report if desired by the design engineer or if requested by the development department. 
(10)  The design of every detention facility of any type shall consider the effects both of inflows in excess of those the facility is designed to accommodate and of malfunctioning of the primary outlet system. A safe path for overflow condition flows shall be provided. 
(d)  Detention facility location criteria. 
(1)  Residential detention facilities shall be located outside the boundaries of a permitted building lot. Access shall be provided via a graded and grassed roadway not less than 12 feet wide and minimum grade practical within a 25-foot wide deeded property strip. Access shall not occur on any permittable building lot. 
(2)  For purposes of these regulations, a detention facility shall be deemed to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits, the dam (if one) including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements, and any energy dissipation devices. 
(3)  Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on-site that bypasses the facility. 
(4)  No portion of any detention facility shall disturb any required buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area. 
(5)  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a neighboring lot. 
(6)  Detention facilities may encroach upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the engineer of written permission from both the property and utility owners. 
(e)  Residential detention facility access requirements. Deeded property at least 25 feet in width shall be required to provide access to all residential detention facilities from a public street. This access shall be cleared, grubbed and/or graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. Its location shall be as to minimize the amount of grading required. 
(f)  Residential detention facility maintenance. 
(1)  The detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural or man-made, shall not be removed or diminished without the express approval of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  A homeowner's association is required to be established prior to final plat approval. All residential detention facilities shall become the responsibility of the homeowner's association or the owner/developer for maintenance upon the county's approval of the final plat and the detention facility engineers certification and record (as-built) drawings. 
(3)  In his discretion, the director may consider another entity other than a home owner's association to be responsible for maintenance of the detention facility. 
(g)  Detention facility construction standards. 
(1)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans reviewed and approved by the engineer, and shall be in place and inspected prior to the initiation of other improvements. If the detention facility is planned to be a lake, temporary detention facilities shall be provided and shall remain in place until such time as the lake has become effective in providing stormwater management. 
(2)  Within a detention basin, all stumps are to be cut flush with the ground or removed and all debris is to be removed below the ten-year ponding elevation. Trees or shrubs may be allowed to remain below the ten-year ponding elevation only upon certification of the survivability of the vegetation. 
(3)  Detention slopes that are disturbed are to be grassed and the ground cover within the basin shall be well established with all exposed areas covered prior to the end of the maintenance period. All sloped shall be 3:1 maximum. 
(4)  If the developer desires to place a fence around a detention facility, it shall be a minimum six-foot high fence of durable material, with a 12-foot wide access gate. Fencing may be required by the development department for hazardous detention ponds. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-15, § 1) 
Sec. 86-173. - Culverts and piped drainage systems. 
(a)  Drainage improvements required. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-ways and private properties adjoining projects sites and/or public right-of-ways. 
(b)  Standard specifications. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to stormwater conveyance facility construction shall conform to the most recent standard specifications of the state DOT. 
(c)  Design criteria—General. All street and stormwater conveyance facility construction shall be performed under the direct inspection of the public works department. The subdivider/developer shall have full responsibility for the quality and safety of the work performed. The public works department shall be notified 24 hours prior to each phase of construction. 
(1)  All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the state. 
(2)  Stormwater flows from drainage areas up to 25 acres in size may be calculated using the rational method. Flow from drainage areas between ten and 2,000 acres in size may be calculated using the SCS method or other approved methods. Flows for drainage areas larger than 2,000 acres must be calculated using published FEMA data or USGS regional analysis. 
(3)  Runoff coefficients used for pre- and postdevelopment conditions for the rational methods shall be consistent with standard engineering practices. For the SCS method the runoff curve numbers found in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" shall be used. For any stormwater analysis, the composite "C" (rational method) or CN (SCS method) used for predeveloped conditions shall not exceed 0.3 or 66, respectively, unless approval has been obtained through the development department. 
(d)  Design criteria—Culverts. 
(1)  Culverts (structures designed to convey water from one side of a public right-of-way to the other and carry the runoff from a contributing drainage area) shall be designed to pass the peak flow associated with a 100-year storm with at least one foot of freeboard between the 100-year ponding elevation and the top of the roadway shoulder, without rising the 100-year flood elevation on upstream properties, and in accordance with the chapter 46, flood damage prevention, of the County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  All pipes are to be designed for inlet and outlet control conditions. Appropriate charts and tables are to be placed on the plans. 
(3)  The 100-year ponding limits above the culvert shall be shown on the construction plans and on the final plat (if applicable). 
(4)  The minimum allowable culvert diameter shall be 18 inches. 
(5)  Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the "Georgia DOT Drainage Manual for Highways," chapter 7, and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control structures. 
(e)  Piped collection systems. 
(1)  The design (initial pipe sizing and profile design) of piped collection systems required under subsection (a) herein shall be based upon conveyance of the peak flows associated with a 100-year storm with the hydraulic grade line being at or below the structure throat throughout the system. 
(2)  Based on the analysis of 100-year conditions, the preliminary design shall be revised where necessary to produce a final design for which the likelihood of dwelling flooding, major property damage, or substantial public access and/or utility interruption shall be less than one chance in 100 years. 
(3)  Catch basins and/or drop inlets shall be designed by the developer's engineer or registered surveyor to state highway standards and subject to final approval by the public works department. This chart may be used for street water in lieu of calculations per structure: 
a.  500 feet on grades up to seven percent; 
b.  400 feet on grades from seven percent to ten percent; and 
c.  250 feet on grades over ten percent. 
(4)  Catch basins shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for a 50-year design flow shall not exceed six feet, as measured from the face of the curb. Gutter spread calculations are required if the above chart is not used. 
(5)  Complete flow, velocity, and hydraulic grade line computations, shall be provided for all portions of a piped collection system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm drainage profiles contained with the development plans for the 100-year storm. 
(6)  Should a bridge ever be required it must meet all state DOT and public works department standards. 
(7)  Inverts are required in all structures, leaving no standing water. All inverts are to be constructed of grout or concrete. 
(8)  All structures are to be precast concrete or brick construction in accordance with state DOT and the public works department standard details. 
(9)  On final plats, problem lots will require a residential drainage plan prior to obtaining a building permit. Problem lots are to be determined by the community development department. Residential drainage plans shall be drawn at one-inch equals 50 feet minimum with two-foot existing and proposed topography. 
(10)  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet. 
(11)  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that restricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or erosion shall be repaired or corrected before final acceptance by the county. 
(12)  Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with State Highway Standards 1030D (or most current). 
(13)  Storm drainage pipe shall be bedded in No. 57 gravel, if firm soil is not available. 
(14)  A certification of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
(15)  Storm drainage pipes shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of three FPS (feet per second) so that sediment will not collect. 
(16)  State Highway Standard 1030D (or most current) shall be used in determining class (concrete) or gauge of pipe under-fill, method of back-filling and pipe installation. 
(f)  Energy dissipation—Piped systems and culvert. 
(1)  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash-pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped collection system. (Please refer to the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.") 
(2)  Energy dissipation devices shall be located entirely within the project site, and shall not encroach upon any required buffer. 
(3)  When uniform, graded stone rip-rap is used for energy dissipation, ultraviolet resistant filter fabric (200-pound test) shall be used between the stone layers. 
(g)  Minimum pipe specifications. All corrugated galvanized pipe located within a street right-of-way, drainage easement, or detention facility shall be asphalt coated. All corrugated galvanized pipe that will carry a live stream, within a street right-of-way, drainage easement, or in a detention facility shall be either: 
(1)  Asphalt coated with a paved invert; or 
(2)  Asphalt coated with a concrete lining. 
(h)  Pipe length. 
(1)  Culverts carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the roadway slope. 
(2)  Pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. In nonresidential subdivisions, these pipes may temporarily end at the right-of-way line, but shall be extended as part of a subsequent development permit approved for the individual site. 
(i)  Pipe installation. 
(1)  Reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated steel pipe, corrugated aluminum pipe and corrugated aluminized steel pipe shall be bedded and backfilled in the same manner. 
(2)  Installation, backfilling and compaction shall be done in accordance with the public works department standards. 
(j)  End finish. 
(1)  Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts (except under residential driveways) and at the outlet of all piped collection systems according to public works department standards. 
(2)  Headwalls are to be pre-cast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced with concrete reinforced concrete footings. 
(k)  Junction boxes and catch basins. Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the state DOT and public works department standards. All pipe junctions shall have junction boxes. Junction boxes and catch basins shall have metal manhole frames and lids for access. 
(l)  Other structures. Natural bottom arches and box culverts may be used in accordance with the latest standard specifications of the state DOT or county specifications. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-15, § 1) 
Sec. 86-174. - Surface drainage. 
(a)  Design standards. 
(1)  All new proposed channels shall be designed to carry at least the 100-year storm with one foot of freeboard. 
(2)  Transition channels shall be provided at the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts and pipe systems, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  The maximum flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line shall not exceed the pre-developed velocity. 
(4)  In cases of potential erosion due to irregular channel alignment, extreme velocities, or excessive slopes, a paved ditch shall be required, unless otherwise directed by the public works department. 
(5)  The cross-sectional shape of channels shall be as found in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". "V" shaped cross-sections are not permitted in grassed channels. 
(6)  If the channel will be affected by backwater from culverts, bridges, other structures or floodplains, backwater elevations shall be shown in profiles of the channel. 
(b)  Construction standards. 
(1)  The channel shall be shaped to the dimensions specified on the approved plans and shall be free of over-falls, gullies or other irregularities. 
(2)  Channels in fills shall be lined. 
(3)  Protective cover in grassed channels shall be installed as soon as the earthwork is completed. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-15, § 1) 
Secs. 86-175—86-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FEES 

Sec. 86-181. - Filing fees. 
Upon submission of a preliminary plat, final plat, or other plat, and as a prerequisite for acceptance of any such plat for review and consideration by the county, the applicant shall submit such required filing fees as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. Said fees shall be submitted with the plat and, upon acceptance of said plat for review and consideration, shall be deposited into the general fund of the county. Failure to pay such fees as required, shall cause the plat to be returned to the applicant, without acceptance for review or consideration by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-182. - Other fees. 
Following the approval of a preliminary plat and construction plans, as required under article II, procedure, and article III, plat specifications, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall pay into the general fund of the county, such required land disturbance permit fee, site inspection fees, curb cut and street sign fees as may be established from time to time by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-183. - Method of payment. 
All required fees shall be paid only by personal check, corporate check, cashier's check or money order. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-184. - Performance and/or maintenance bonds. 
Prior to approval of a final plat under provisions of article II, procedure, and as a prerequisite for acceptance of any such final plat for review and consideration by the county, the developer shall provide to the county such performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required by these regulations and established from time to time, by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-185—86-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 86-201. - Generally. 
These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the public works department of the county, and enforced by the department of community development of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Secs. 86-202—86-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 86-211. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of these regulations, shall be deemed liable for civil penalties not less than $1,000.00 and not to exceed $2,500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days. Each day the violation continues, shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations shall be placed, or shall exist, and any person who may assist such violation shall be deemed in violation of these regulations and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. The magistrate court of the county, or any court of competent jurisdiction, shall have jurisdiction of any offense charged under this paragraph. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of these regulations, not withstanding any limitation of law regarding penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, the magistrate court, or other court of competent jurisdiction, shall be authorized to impose penalties for violations here under of not less than $1,000.00 and not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation and/or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Sec. 86-212. - Additional remedies. 
In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this resolution or any amendment thereto adopted by the board of commissioners, any owner of real estate having an affected property interest may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX A 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
CARROLL COUNTY 
INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT, made this _______ day of _______ 200_____, between _______ (Developer), hereinafter referred to as "Indemnitor," and CARROLL COUNTY, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "Carroll County, Indemnitee." 
For good and valuable consideration, receipt of which is acknowledged, it is hereby agreed: 
Section 1. Liability, Loss or Damage. Indemnitor hereby agrees to promptly notify Carroll County of any claim or demand and indemnify Carroll County and hold Carroll County harmless from any and all damage which Carroll County may suffer and from any and all liability, claims, demands, attorney's fees and cost of defense, or judgment against it, arising from the negligent increase of flow or negligent diversion of flow of water resulting from the development of the _______ Subdivision/Development being more particularly described as follows: 
[INSERT LEGAL DESCRIPTION HERE] 
Section 2. Duration. Indemnity under this agreement shall commence on the date of execution hereof and shall continue in full force for a period of ten years from said commencement date. 
Section 3. Requirement of Notice to Indemnitor. Carroll County agrees to notify indemnitor in writing of any claim of Carroll County for loss or damage or of any claim made against Carroll County on the obligation indemnified against. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this agreement at Carrollton, Georgia, the day and year first above written. 
        Indemnitor 
FOR CARROLL COUNTY 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX B 
1  Maintenance Securities. A maintenance bond or equivalent form of security as approved by the County Attorney, in favor of the County, shall be posted with the County by all subdividers, developers, or other persons where street, storm drains, stormwater management facilities, greenspace facilities to include trail systems, or other improvements (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "infrastructure improvements"), are made according to the rules and regulations of the Subdivision Ordinance. 
2  The amount of this bond will be calculated by the following formula: 20 percent of construction costs for other infrastructure improvements. The minimum amount of a bond shall be $15,000.00. 
3  The bond shall be filed with the Community Development Department at the time of submittal of the final plat. 
4  Separate bonds are required for each unit of development, phase or like subdivision. If the development is phased, the subdivider shall be responsible for the infrastructure improvements in the first phase until all phases have been accepted. 
5  The bond period shall remain in effect until all infrastructure improvements from all phases and complete and maintained for twelve (12) months after final inspection is approved. The subdivider shall notify the Director of Public Works that all infrastructure improvements are complete and request a final inspection. If the Director of Public Works approves the final inspection, the twelve (12) months of maintenance shall begin. At the end of the 12-month period of maintenance, the County shall either: 
a.  Release the bond and, if appropriate, accept the bonded infrastructure improvements. 
b.  Require an additional bond period of up to 12 months, if the infrastructure improvements are not maintained to the satisfaction of the County. 
c.  Call the bond and hold the bond proceeds if the infrastructure improvements are not properly maintained to the County's satisfaction or call the bond and use the bond proceeds to properly maintains the infrastructure improvements using the bond proceeds. 
6  Bonds or equivalent forms of security from banks having local (Atlanta area) offices are preferred. The bond must contain the following information and be substantially in this form: 
CARROLL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
MAINTENANCE & WARRANTY BOND 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: that 
a Corporation, hereinafter called Principal, and 

 
a Corporation of the State of _______, and a surety authorized by law to do business in the State of Georgia, hereinafter called Surety, are held and firmly bound unto 
Carroll County Board of Commissioners (Name of Obligee)  423 College Street, Carrollton, Georgia, 30117 (Address of Obligee) 
hereinafter referred to as Obligee, are held and firmly bound unto said Obligee and all persons maintaining and warranting infrastructure improvements hereinafter referred to, in the penal sum of 
in lawful money of the United States, for the payment of which sum well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators and successors, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. 
THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such, as whereas the Principal is obligated to maintain and warrant for the street, storm drains, stormwater management facilities, greenspace facilities to include trail systems, or other improvements (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "infrastructure improvements"), some of which may be dedicated to Carroll County, unless expressly authorized, in connection with the development of _______ (project Name). 
The bond period shall remain in effect until all infrastructure improvements from all phases are complete and maintained for twelve (12) months after a final inspection is approved. The Principal shall notify the Director of Public Works that all infrastructure improvements are complete and request a final inspection. If the Director of Public Works approves the final inspection, the twelve (12) months of maintenance shall begin. At the end of the 12-month period of maintenance, the County shall either: 
a.  Accept the bonded infrastructure improvements and release the bond. 
b.  Require an additional bond period of up to 12 months, if the infrastructure improvements are not properly maintained to the satisfaction of the County. In that case, the undersigned, prior to the expiration of this bond, shall be required to provide an additional bond for an additional 12 month period with a federal secured lending institution or this bond will be forfeited and the proceeds shall be paid in full to the Carroll County Board of Commissioners. 
c.  Call the bond and hold the bond proceeds if the infrastructure improvements are not properly maintained to the County's satisfaction or call the bond and use the bond proceeds to properly maintains the infrastructure improvements using the bond proceeds. 
NOW, THEREFORE THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH, that if the Principal shall well, truly, fully and faithfully maintain and warrant the infrastructure improvements according to the preliminary plat, construction plans, greenspace plan, maintenance plan, and final plat during the period from its issuance and any twelve month extension that may be required by the Obligee, with or without notice to the Surety, and during the life of any infrastructure improvement required to be maintained and warranted under the preliminary plat, construction plans, open space plan, and final plat, and shall also well and truly maintain and warrant all the undertakings, maintenance, terms, and conditions of any and all duly authorized modifications of said infrastructure improvements that may hereafter be made, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
PROVIDED FURTHER, that said Surety to this Bond for value received, hereby stipulates and agrees that no change, extension of time, alterations, or additions to the infrastructure improvements or to the Work to be performed thereunder shall in any way affect its obligation on this bond, and it does hereby waive notice of any such change, extension of time, alterations, or additions to the infrastructure improvements or to the work to be performed thereunder. 
PROVIDED, FURTHER, that Principal and Surety agree and represent that this bond is executed pursuant to and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as Amended, including, but not limited to, O.C.G.A. §§ 13-10-1, et seq. and §§ 36-86-101, et seq., and is intended to be and shall be construed as a bond in compliance with the requirements thereof. 
Notification of forfeiture or the need for an additional bond period shall be made by certified mail at least 30 days prior to the expiration of this instrument. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed in two (2) counterparts, each one of which shall be deemed and original, signed, sealed, and dated this _______ day of _______ A.D., 200_____. 
ATTEST: 

 
NOTE: Date of Bond must not be prior to date of approved final plat but not to exceed thirty days from date of approved final plat. If Contractor is Partnership, all partners should execute Bond. Surety Companies executing Bonds must appear on the Treasury Departments most current list (Circular 570 as amended) and be authorized to transact business in the State where the Project is located. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX C[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, has been treated by the editor as amending the Code by repealing former appendix C in its entirety. Former appendix C pertained to information that should be including in the conceptual conservation plan, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 

APPENDIX D[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of February 5, 2002, has been treated by the editor as amending the Code by repealing former appendix D in its entirety. Former appendix D pertained to information that should be including in the conceptual site plan, and derived from an ordinance of October 16, 2001. 

APPENDIX E 
The Preliminary Plat Shall Contain the Following: 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
1.  Show name of project and date of submittal. 
2.  Show the name, address and phone number of the developer. Show seal and signature of professional engineer or qualified plan preparer. 
3.  The minimum scale for preliminary plats shall be 1" = 100' unless otherwise approved by the Department. 
4.  Plats shall be drawn on no larger than a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet of paper. 
5.  Plats shall include north arrow and show land lot lines and district. 
6.  Provide a tie point to the nearest intersection. 
7.  Plats shall include a location/vicinity map with land lot lines: minimum scale 1" = 2000'. 
8.  Show plat certificates. 
EXISTING CONDITIONS 
1.  State the present zoning of the property. 
2.  Note the zoning case number, date of approval and all variances and conditions of zoning (if applicable). 
3.  Show the zoning of adjacent properties including property owners name, subdivision name, lot numbers, land uses, etc. 
4.  Show any jurisdictional (city or county) boundary lines. 
5.  Show topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet. 
6.  Show location of streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding or hydraulic engineering calculations of existing conditions. 
7.  Show all structures, both above and below ground, that might interfere with the proposed construction. 
8.  Show name, location, right-of-way, dimension from centerline, pavement width and surface type of all streets and roads on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. 
9.  Show location of right-of-way and easements, railroads, and other utilities on or adjacent to the property. 
10.  Show the size and location of existing water mains, drains, culverts and all other facilities and structures, both above and below ground, within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. 
11.  Identify the watershed basin(s) within which the proposed development is located. 
12.  Identify the acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
13.  Show water pressure and flow test results. 
PROPOSED CONDITIONS 
1.  State the total number of acres and number of lots. 
2.  Show the layout of all lots, including front, side and rear building setback lines, scaled dimensions on lots and utility easements with width and use. 
3.  Note the minimum lot size requirement and square footage area of each lot. 
4.  Show the proposed unit division or stage development, if any. 
5.  Identify all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
6.  Show all require buffers (if applicable). 
7.  Show 10 foot "No Access Easement" along the rear of all double frontage lots. 
8.  Show and state names, right-of-way, dimension from centerline, pavement width and surface type of all proposed roads. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX F 
If the Preliminary Plat proposes residential development, it shall contain the following additional information (Construction Specifications): 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1.  Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat. 
2.  Show project name and date of submittal. 
3.  Show developer's name, address and phone number. 
4.  Show owner's name, address and phone number if other than developer. 
5.  Show Engineer/Designer's name, address and phone number. 
6.  Plans shall have a Professional Engineer/Landscape Architect/Surveyor's seal with signature. 
7.  Show any jurisdictional (city or county) boundary lines. 
8.  Show location/vicinity map with lot lines; minimum scale 1" = 2000'. 
9.  Show graphic scale, north arrow and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid point. 
10.  Show land lot lines, corner and district. 
11.  Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 50 feet, unless otherwise specified herein. 
12.  Show closed property boundary with bearings and distances of all property lines. 
13.  State the total acreage of the project. 
14.  Show all existing conditions, structures, pavement widths, etc. 
15.  Include a 24-hour emergency contact name and phone number in bold type (No smaller than 20 point type) on cover sheet, sediment and erosion control plan and grading plan. 
ENGINEERING FOR GRADING/STORM DRAINAGE 
1.  Topographic layout of the development must be at two (2) foot contour intervals based on Mean Sea Level datum (existing and proposed contours). 
2.  Identify the location, size and length of existing drainage structures with drainage area. 
3.  Show drainage calculations stating how drainage structures were sized. Calculations must be sealed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect. Indicate outlet velocity at all pipe outlets. 
4.  Show location and design criteria of accessory drainage structures (headwalls, drainage ditches, catch basins, junction boxes, drop inlets, retention areas and retention outlet controls). 
5.  Include street profiles with all cross drainpipes located. 
6.  Show profile of storm drainage pipes. 
7.  Indicate drainage at intersections using flow arrows on plan or profile sheet. 
8.  State and show the 100-year flood plain limits and elevations, or note absence, Indicate Community Panel Number and date of panel referenced. Show/note lot FFE at 100-year elevation plus 2 vertical feet (if applicable). 
9.  State and show all areas that are subject to flooding due to High Water Line or Dam Break Zone of any proposed or existing lake(s) (if applicable). 
10.  Show ingress/egress easement to storm water detention structure and sufficient maintenance easement to include the surface area inundated by the 100-year storm event and 100-year backwater elevation on all pipes. 
11.  Show or indicate whether small parts of a site are in compliance with a previously approved drainage plan of parent site (if applicable). 
12.  Identify water travel distance in street between catch basins. 
13.  Show easements for all storm water directed across property lines and piping system. All easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
14.  Show easements covering all roadway fill constructed on individual building lots. 
15.  Provide detail of outlet control structure. 
16.  Show cross section through the detention pond dam. 
17.  Show/note all storm structures per GA DOT/Public Works Dept. standards. 
18.  Show/note all pipe gauge/class per GA DOT/Public Works Dept. standards. 
19.  Show design/detail of all drainage ditches. 
ENGINEERING FOR SITE HYDROLOGY STUDY 
1.  Hydrology study must be prepared and stamped by a Professional Engineer. 
2.  Include narrative explaining the rationale and method used in design. 
3.  Include a draiange area sketch showing all drainage basins and sub-basins. Drainage basins shall be clearly labeled and correlate to basin identifiers used in the study. 
4.  Include a drainage area sketch showing the direction of flow and acreage of drainage area for storm water entering and exiting the site. 
5.  Give a summary of pre-development and post-development flows. 
6.  Allowable discharge from the site depends upon downstream conditions. Explain impact on lower adjacent properties. Describe the conditions of the downstream receiving the concentrated discharge from the site. 
7.  Identify off-site drainage. 
8.  Identify drainage areas that bypass detention in a developed state. Demonstrate how these flows are managed to a pre-development rate. 
ENGINEERING FOR SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
1.  Site Plan Requirements 
(a)  Show graphic scale and north arrow. 
(b)  Existing and planned contours shall be shown with contours lines drawn width an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(c)  Give location of erosion and sediment control practices, using uniform coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6, with legend. 
(d)  Delineate all state waters and wetlands located on or within 200 feet of the project site. If no state waters and/or wetlands are located on or within 200 feet of the project site, provide statement in bold print — "No state waters or wetlands are located on or within 200 feet of this project." 
(e)  If the project contains or appears to contain wetlands, the following note must be provided in bold-face type: "This site contains wetlands. The applicant will first obtain approval and the proper permit from the Corps of Engineers prior to disturbing any jurisdictional wetlands." 
(f)  Delineate the 25-foot undisturbed buffers of state waters and 50-foot buffer along designated trout streams. Where encroachment into buffers is proposed, provide documentation that appropriate variances have been obtained. 
(g)  Delineate all wetlands and provide regulatory documentation permitting any proposed impacts. 
(h)  Delineate contributing drainage areas both on and off site. 
(i)  Include soil series and their delineation. 
(j)  Show neighboring areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. that might be affected by the proposed subdivision. 
2.  General Notes 
(a)  "Erosion control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source. 
(b)  "Additional erosion and sediment control devices to used as required by Carroll County." 
(c)  "Disturbed areas left idle for two to four weeks, and not to final grade, will be established with temporary mulch and/or vegetation (Ds1) (Ds2). Disturbed areas left idle for four weeks or more will be established to permanent vegetation (Ds3). All areas to final grade will be established to permanent vegetation within two weeks." 
(d)  "When hand planting, mulch (hay or straw) should be uniformly spread over seeded area within 24 hours of seeding." 
(e)  During unsuitable growing seasons, mulch will be used as a temporary cover. On slopes that are 4:1 or steeper, mulch will be anchored." 
(f)  "Carroll County Land Disturbance Permit must be displayed on site at all times during construction and in plain view from a county road or street." 
(g)  "Erosion and sediment control devices must be checked by the developer/operator after each storm event. Each device is to be maintained or replaced if sediment accumulation has reached one half the capacity of the device." 
(h)  Include the statement in bold letters that, "The escape of sediment from the site shall be prevented by the installation of erosion control measures and practices prior to, and concurrent with, land disturbing activities." 
(i)  It is the subdivider/developer's responsibility to establish erosion control for all drainage patterns created at various stages during any phase of construction. Any difficulty in controlling erosion during construction shall be reported to the design engineer immediately. 
(j)  The subdivider/developer is responsible for obtaining any permits that may be required for wetlands or streamside buffers encroachments. 
3.  Other Information 
(a)  Provide name, address and phone number of developer/owner. 
(b)  Provide name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Include signature and seal of qualified plan preparer. 
(d)  Identify the size, in acres, of project or phase under construction. Note the disturbed area in acres. 
(e)  Provide detailed construction activity schedule - show anticipated starting and completion dates for project events, including vegetation/mulching. 
(f)  Provide a minimum of 67 cubic yards per acre sediment storage. Include specific design information and calculations for all structural measures on site, such as temporary sediment basins, retrofitted detention ponds and sediment traps. 
(g)  Show storm drain pipe and weir velocities and demonstrate how receiving area will accommodate discharge without erosion. 
(h)  For all temporary and permanent vegetation practices, include species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizing, lime and mulching rates. Vegetation plan shall be site specific for appropriate time of year that seeding will take place and for this geographic region of Georgia. 
(i)  Include detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications must, at a minimum, meet guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
TRANSPORTATION 
1.  General Information. Provide assurance that all Georgia DOT permits (if applicable) have been obtained. Add note: "Construction equipment shall not be parked in right-of-way, and must be stored within site." 
2.  Typical Sections 
(a)  Include paving and base elements on typical sections. Label each layer as to the thickness or spread rate, and type of material to be used. 
(b)  Express cross slopes of roadway pavement, shoulder surfaces and sidewalks as percentages. Show outer slopes by ratio, horizontal to vertical (e.g., 3:1). 
(c)  Show right-of-way widths. 
(d)  Label curb and gutter or typical sections per Georgia DOT and/or County standards. 
(e)  Show sidewalk or typical sections with width and cross slope (if applicable) 
(f)  Show all existing and proposed utilities. 
3.  Road Profiles 
(a)  Profiles shall have a horizontal scale of not more than 1:100 and a 1:10 vertical scale. 
(b)  Profiles shall existing ground and the proposed profile grade for the mainline, side road or streets and driveways. 
(c)  Profiles and plan views shall have corresponding stations. 
(d)  Show grades for all tangent stations. 
(e)  Vertical curves shall include the Point of Vertical Curvature (PVC), Point of Vertical Tangency (PVT) and each Point of Vertical Intersection (PVI). 
(f)  Show curve length between the PVC and PVT. Label the "K" factor for the curve and the curve length. Label the high point and the low point in the same manner as the PVC and PVT. 
(g)  Show and label all intersecting streets. This shall include the street name, station on the mainline, and the station on the intersecting street along a line oriented vertically and placed at the correct station along the mainline. 
(h)  Show the existing ground profile along the same horizontal alignment. This profile should depict the ground as it existed prior to the proposed construction, including ditches, creeks, etc., which may be intersected by the horizontal alignment. 
4.  Intersection Details 
(a)  Intersection detail sheets are required if additional details necessary for proper construction of items at road intersections cannot be clearly shown on the regular roadway plan sheets. 
(b)  Typical information that may be found on intersection detail sheets include edges of pavement, locations or elevations, dimensions, channelizing curbs and raised median locations, along with handicap ramps, drainage structures, traffic signal poles and utility poles. 
(c)  Indicate elevation along edges of pavement in the area of the intersection by listing the elevation at regular intervals or by using contours. 
(d)  Provide intersection grading plans where necessary to properly detail cross slope transitions and drainage requirements. 
(e)  Dimension and station all intersection details, including pavement widths, curb and median radii, radius returns, horizontal location of raised medians, center of median and/or channelization openings, lane tapers, etc. 
(f)  Show all existing and proposed traffic control devices and stripping. 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT INFORMATION 
1.  A soil analysis overlaying the preliminary plat. 
2.  The soil analysis must be a comprehensive soil analysis showing soil classification, predicated and/or measured seasonal high ground water levels, perched water table, or other restrictive layers such as rock. 
3.  Provide the signature and seal of an engineer registered in the State of Georgia who is practicing geotechnical engineering meeting the requirements established in the Health Department's current Manual for On-site Sewage Management Systems. 
4.  The report shall also include wetland delineation and any soil features or conditions which may effect the property function of subsurface sewage disposal, including absorption rates at specific depths. 
GENERAL NOTES (SUBDIVIDER SHALL PROVIDE ON SEPARATE COVER SHEET) 
a.  Name of Development; Subdivider's name, address, and telephone number; 24 hour contact telephone number and name; location & vicinity map. 
b.  Acceptance of these plans by the County does not relieve permit holder from meeting all requirements of the "Carroll County Zoning Ordinance", "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance", "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance", the Rules and Regulations of the Carroll County Health Department, the US Army Corps of Engineers and any other local, state, or federal law or regulation as it relates to the development in Carroll County. 
c.  The location of erosion and sediment control devices may have to be altered from that shown on the accepted plans due to changes in drainage patterns created during construction. It is the owner/developers responsibility to accomplish erosion and sediment control for all drainage patterns created at various states and phases during construction. Any difficulty in controlling erosion or sediment during any phase of construction shall be reported to the project engineer immediately. Failure to properly install, operate or maintain all erosion and sedimentation control measures may result in all construction being stopped until such measures are corrected to the satisfaction of the Carroll County inspector. 
d.  Erosion control measures will be inspected at least weekly and after each rain, and repaired by general contractor. 
e.  Detention/sediment pond(s) and diversion ditches shall be installed immediately after clearing for roadway construction. Detention pond(s) shall be retrofitted for siltation control. Engineer shall immediately follow-up with as-built certification for design compliance prior to acceptance of final plat. 
f.  Owner agrees by implementation of these plans that all land clearing, construction, development and drainage activities will be done according to these accepted plans or previously accepted revisions. Owner acknowledges that acceptance of plans by the County in no way relieves owner of responsibility not to adversely impact downstream property regarding any land disturbing activity, erosion and sediment control measure and/or stormwater management activity during or after construction. Owner acknowledges that the acceptance of these plans and the issuance of this land disturbance permit does not in any way suggest that all other requirements for the legal or appropriate operations for this activity, which may require additional permitting or approvals may be necessary if any to operate from this point in an appropriate and legal manner. Plan acceptance or permit issuance does not absolve the applicant from complying with all applicable laws, policies, standards or other permits which may be required for this project. 
g.  Any and all land disturbance permits may be revoked at any time if the construction of project is not in strict accordance with accepted plans. 
h.  Drainage easements will be provided along all concentrated drainage paths a minimum width of 20'. Required widths and locations will be referenced and shown on final plat. Proposed drainage ditches will be provided with privately owned easements and are to be maintained and protected by individual lot owners. Notice of same shall be included on final plat and subsequent deeds of conveyance from the developer to the individual lot owners. Open drainage shall be 4:1 side slopes or flatter and fall entirely within easement. Residential fences and other flow obstructions are not allowed within drainage easements. 
i.  The performance of all storm water drainage systems including detention facilities have been checked using the 100 - year storm (developed condition) for evaluation of local flooding and possible flood hazards to adjacent structures and/or property. The cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
j.  Acceptance of these plans does not constitute approval by Carroll County of any land disturbing activity within wetland areas. It is the owner's responsibility to contact the appropriate regulatory agency for approval of any wetland area disturbance. 
k.  It is the owner's responsibility to ensure that all residential lots have sufficient grade and adequate drainage to prevent flooding of proposed structures and pertinent improvements such as on-site septic systems. Developer shall notify builder of any special conditions relating to lot drainage and flooding potential. 
l.  Owner/developer is responsible for maintaining control of silt on-site at all times. Developer is also responsible for control of silt that is tracked onto County R/W or subdivision streets by builders, contractors, subcontractors, utility companies or any others during construction until street has been accepted by County Public Works Department. 
m.  Maintain a minimum 2' of cover over storm pipes. All corrugated metal pipe to be maintained by county shall be fully asphalt coated. Paved inverts are required in perennial streams. Pipe gage determined based on depth of cover and loading conditions. 
n.  Debris fills are strictly prohibited at all construction sites or within any development. All waste and construction debris generated from construction must be property disposed of in an appropriate landfill. 
o.  All street and stop signs must be installed prior to issuance of any building permits. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX G 
If the Preliminary Plat Proposes Nonresidential Development, it Shall Contain the Following Additional Information: 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1.  Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat. 
2.  Show project name and date of submittal. 
3.  Show developer's name, address and phone number. 
4.  Show owner's name, address and phone number if other than developer. 
5.  Show Engineer/Designer's name, address and phone number. 
6.  Plans shall have a Professional Engineer/Landscape Architect/Surveyor's seal with signature. 
7.  Show any jurisdictional (city or county) boundary lines. 
8.  Show location/vicinity map with lot lines; minimum scale 1" = 2000'. 
9.  Show graphic scale, north arrow and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid point. 
10.  Show land lot lines, corner and district. 
11.  Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 50 feet, unless otherwise specified herein. 
12.  Show closed property boundary with bearings and distances of all property lines. 
13.  State the total acreage of the project. 
14.  Show all existing conditions, structures, pavement widths, etc. 
15.  Include a 24-hour emergency contact name and phone number in bold type (No smaller than 20 point type) on cover sheet, sediment and erosion control plan and grading plan. 
16.  Noted in Erosion and Sedimentation Section (General Notes (2)). 
ENGINEERING FOR GRADING/STORM DRAINAGE 
1.  Topographic layout of the development must be at two (2) foot contour intervals based on Mean Sea Level datum (existing and proposed contours). 
2.  Identify the location, size and length of existing drainage structures with drainage area. 
3.  Show drainage calculations stating how drainage structures were sized. Calculations must be sealed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect. Indicate outlet velocity at all pipe outlets. 
4.  Show location and design criteria of accessory drainage structures (headwalls, drainage ditches, catch basins, junction boxes, drop inlets, retention areas and retention outlet controls). 
5.  Include street profiles with all cross drainpipes located. 
6.  Show profile of storm drainage pipes. 
7.  Indicate drainage at intersections using flow arrows on plan or profile sheet. 
8.  State and show the 100-year flood plain limits and elevations, or note absence. Indicate Community Panel Number and date of panel referenced. Show/note lot FFE at 100-year elevation plus 4 vertical feet (if applicable). 
9.  State and show all areas that are subject to flooding due to High Water Line or Dam Break Zone of any proposed or existing lake(s) (if applicable). 
10.  Show ingress/egress easement to storm water detention structure and sufficient maintenance easement to include the surface area inundated by the 100-year storm event and 100-year backwater elevation on all pipes. 
11.  Show or indicate whether small parts of a site are in compliance with a previously approved drainage plan of parent site (if applicable). 
12.  Identify water travel distance in street between catch basins. 
13.  Show easements for all storm water directed across property lines and piping system. All easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
14.  Show easements covering all roadway fill constructed on individual building lots. 
15.  Provide detail of outlet control structure. 
16.  Show cross section through the detention pond dam. 
17.  Show/note all storm structures per GA DOT/Public Works Dept. standards. 
18.  Show/note all pipe gauge/class per GA DOT/Public Works Dept. standards. 
19.  Show design/detail of all drainage ditches. 
ENGINEERING FOR SITE HYDROLOGY STUDY 
1.  Hydrology study must be prepared and stamped by a Professional Engineer. 
2.  Include narrative explaining the rationale and method used in design. 
3.  Include a drainage area sketch showing all drainage basins and sub-basins. Drainage basins shall be clearly labeled and correlate to basin identifiers used in the study. 
4.  Include a drainage area sketch showing the direction of flow and acreage of drainage area for storm water entering and exiting the site. 
5.  Give a summary of pre-development and post-development flows. 
6.  Allowable discharge from the site depends upon downstream conditions. Explain impact on lower adjacent properties. Describe the conditions of the downstream receiving the concentrated discharge from the site. 
7.  Identify off-site drainage. 
8.  Identify drainage areas that bypass detention in a developed state. Demonstrate how these flows are managed to a pre-development rate. 
ENGINEERING FOR SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
1.  Site Plan Requirements 
(a)  Show graphic scale and north arrow. 
(b)  Existing and planned contours shall be shown with contours lines drawn width an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(c)  Give location of erosion and sediment control practices, using uniform coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6, with legend. 
(d)  Delineate all state waters and wetlands located on or within 200 feet of the project site. If no state waters and/or wetlands are located on or within 200 feet of the project site, provide statement in bold print — "No state waters or wetlands are located on or within 200 feet of this project." 
(e)  If the project contains or appears to contain wetlands, the following note must be provided in bold-face type: "This site contains wetlands. The applicant will first obtain approval and the proper permit from the Corps of Engineers prior to disturbing any jurisdictional wetlands." 
(f)  Delineate the 25-foot undisturbed buffers of state waters and 50-foot buffer along designated trout streams. Where encroachment into buffers is proposed, provide documentation that appropriate variances have been obtained. 
(g)  Delineate all wetlands and provide regulatory documentation permitting any proposed impacts. 
(h)  Delineate contributing drainage areas both on and off site. 
(i)  Include soil series and their delineation. 
(j)  Show neighboring areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. that might be affected by the proposed subdivision. 
2.  General Notes 
(a)  "Erosion control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(b)  "Additional erosion and sediment control devices to used as required by Carroll County." 
(c)  "Disturbed areas left idle for two to four weeks, and not to final grade, will be established with temporary mulch and/or vegetation (Ds1) (Ds2). Disturbed areas left idle for four weeks or more will be established to permanent vegetation (Ds3). All areas to final grade will be established to permanent vegetation within two weeks." 
(d)  "When hand planting, mulch (hay or straw) should be uniformly spread over seeded area within 24 hours of seeding." 
(e)  "During unsuitable growing seasons, mulch will be used as a temporary cover. On slopes that are 4:1 or steeper, mulch will be anchored." 
(f)  "Carroll County Land Disturbance Permit must be displayed on site at all times during construction and in plain view from a county road or street." 
(g)  "Erosion and sediment control devices must be checked by the developer/operator after each storm event. Each device is to be maintained or replaced if sediment accumulation has reached one half the capacity of the device." 
(h)  Include the statement in bold letters that, "The escape of sediment from the site shall be prevented by the installation of erosion control measures and practices prior to, and concurrent with, land disturbing activities." 
(i)  It is the subdivider/developer's responsibility to establish erosion control for all drainage patterns created at various stages during any phase of construction. Any difficulty in controlling erosion during construction shall be reported to the design engineer immediately. 
(j)  The subdivider/developer is responsible for obtaining any permits that may be required for wetlands or streamside buffers encroachments. 
3.  Other Information 
(a)  Provide name, address and phone number of developer/owner. 
(b)  Provide name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Include signature and seal of qualified plan preparer. 
(d)  Identify the size, in acres, of project or phase under construction. Note the disturbed area in acres. 
(e)  Provide detailed construction activity schedule - show anticipated starting and completion dates for project events, including vegetation/mulching. 
(f)  Provide a minimum of 67 cubic yards per acre sediment storage. Include specific design information and calculations for all structural measures on site, such as temporary sediment basins, retrofitted detention ponds and sediment traps. 
(g)  Show storm drain pipe and weir velocities and demonstrate how receiving area will accommodate discharge without erosion. 
(h)  For all temporary and permanent vegetation practices, include species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizing, lime and mulching rates. Vegetation plan shall be site specific for appropriate time of year that seeding will take place and for this geographic region of Georgia. 
(i)  Include detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications must, at a minimum, meet guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
TRANSPORTATION 
1.  General Information 
(a)  Provide assurance that all Georgia DOT permits (if applicable) have been obtained. 
(b)  Provide overall site plan with building location and size, on-site parking, traffic circulation and all access locations. 
(c)  Show all proposed and existing traffic control devices and striping. 
(d)  Show distance from one corner of the property, along the right-of-way line, to the centerline of the nearest intersecting street. 
(e)  Show posted speed limit. 
(f)  Provide the width of existing roadway pavements, lane widths and direction of travel (using directional arrows) within the lanes. 
(g)  Show the total length of frontage of the property owned and, if different, the length of the frontage being developed under this application. 
(h)  Show the distance from the edge of pavement to the center of the side ditch and direction of flow of water within the ditch. 
(i)  Show proposed driveways width, measured either from face of curb to face of curb, or from edge of pavement to edge of pavement. 
(j)  Show proposed acceleration/deceleration lane(s), including length of lane, length of taper and width of lane (measured from edge of existing travel lane to edge of pavement or to the face of curb). 
(k)  Provide radii for all proposed driveways. 
(l)  Provide stopping sight distance measurements at all proposed driveways. 
(m)  Provide traffic control devices and striping plans. 
(n)  Add note: "Construction equipment shall not be parked in right-of-way, and must be stored within site." 
2.  Typical Sections 
(a)  Include paving and base elements on typical sections. Label each layer as to the thickness or spread rate, and type of material to be used. 
(b)  Express cross slopes of roadway pavement, shoulder surfaces and sidewalks as percentages. Show outer slopes by ratio, horizontal to vertical (e.g., 3:1). 
(c)  Show right-of-way widths. 
(d)  Label curb and gutter or typical sections per Georgia DOT and/or County standards. 
(e)  Show sidewalk or typical sections with width and cross slope (if applicable). 
(f)  Show all existing and proposed utilities. 
3.  Intersection Details 
(a)  Intersection detail sheets are required if additional details necessary for proper construction of items at road intersections cannot be clearly shown on the regular roadway plan sheets. 
(b)  Typical information that may be found on intersection detail sheets include edges of pavement, locations or elevations, dimensions, channelizing curbs and raised median locations, along with handicap ramps, drainage structures, traffic signal poles and utility poles. 
(c)  Indicate elevation along edges of pavement in the area of the intersection by listing the elevation at regular intervals or by using contours. 
(d)  Provide intersection grading plans where necessary to properly detail cross slope transitions and drainage requirements. 
(e)  Dimension and station all intersection details, including pavement widths, curb and median radii, radius returns, horizontal location of raised medians, center of median and/or channelization openings, lane tapers, etc. 
(f)  Show all existing and proposed traffic control devices and stripping. 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
1.  A soil analysis overlaying the preliminary plat. 
2.  The soil analysis must be a comprehensive soil analysis showing soil classification, predicated and/or measured seasonal high ground water levels, perched water table, or other restrictive layers such as rock. 
3.  Provide the signature and seal of an engineer registered in the State of Georgia who is practicing geotechnical engineering meeting the requirements established in the Health Department's current Manual for On-site Sewage Management Systems. 
4.  The report shall also include wetland delineation and any soil features or conditions which may effect the property function of subsurface sewage disposal, including absorption rates at specific depths. 
GENERAL NOTES (SUBDIVIDER SHALL PROVIDE ON SEPARATE COVER SHEET) 
a.  Name of Development; Subdivider's name, address, and telephone number; 24 hour contact telephone number and name; location & vicinity map. 
b.  Acceptance of these plans by the County does not relieve permit holder from meeting all requirements of the "Carroll County Zoning Ordinance", "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance", "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance", the Rules and Regulations of the Carroll County Health Department, the US Army Crops of Engineers and any other local, state, or federal law or regulation as it relates to the development in Carroll County. 
c.  The location of erosion and sediment control devices may have to be altered from that shown on the accepted plans due to changes in drainage patterns created during construction. It is the owner/developers responsibility to accomplish erosion and sediment control for all drainage patterns created at various states and phases during construction. Any difficulty in controlling erosion or sediment during any phase of construction shall be reported to the project engineer immediately. Failure to properly install, operate or maintain all erosion and sedimentation control measures may result in all construction being stopped until such measures are corrected to the satisfaction of the Carroll County inspector. 
d.  Erosion control measures will be inspected at least weekly and after each rain, and repaired by general contractor. 
e.  Detention/sediment pond(s) and diversion ditches shall be installed immediately after clearing for roadway construction. Detention pond(s) shall be retrofitted for siltation control. Engineer shall immediately follow-up with as-built certification for design compliance prior to acceptance of final plat. 
f.  Owner agrees by implementation of these plans that all land clearing, construction, development and drainage activities will be done according to these accepted plans or previously accepted revisions. Owner acknowledges that acceptance of plans by the County in no way relieves owner of responsibility not to adversely impact downstream property regarding any land disturbing activity, erosion and sediment control measure and/or stormwater management activity during or after construction. Owner acknowledges that the acceptance of these plans and the issuance of this land disturbance permit does not in any way suggest that all other requirements for the legal or appropriate operations for this activity, which may require additional permitting or approvals may be necessary if any to operate from this point in an appropriate and legal manner. Plan acceptance or permit issuance does not absolve the applicant from complying with all applicable laws, policies, standards or other permits which may be required for this project. 
g.  Any and all land disturbance permits may be revoked at any time if the construction of project is not in strict accordance with accepted plans. 
h.  Drainage easements will be provided along all concentrated drainage paths a minimum width of 20'. Required widths and locations will be referenced and shown on final plat. Proposed drainage ditches will be provided with privately owned easements and are to be maintained and protected by individual lot owners. Notice of same shall be included on final plat and subsequent deeds of conveyance from the developer to the individual lot owners. Open drainage shall be 4:1 side slopes or flatter and fall entirely within easement. Residential fences and other flow obstructions are not allowed within drainage easements. 
i.  The performance of all storm water drainage systems including detention facilities have been checked using the 100 - year storm (developed condition) for evaluation of local flooding and possible flood hazards to adjacent structures and/or property. The cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
j.  Acceptance of these plans does not constitute approval by Carroll County of any land disturbing activity within wetland areas. It is the owner's responsibility to contact the appropriate regulatory agency for approval of any wetland area disturbance. 
k.  It is the owner's responsibility to ensure that all residential lots have sufficient grade and adequate drainage to prevent flooding of proposed structures and pertinent improvements such as on-site septic systems. Development shall notify builder of any special conditions relating to lot drainage and flooding potential. 
l.  Owner/developer is responsible for maintaining control of silt on-site at all times. Developer is also responsible for control of silt that is tracked onto County R/W or subdivision streets by buildings, contractors, subcontractors, utility companies or any others during construction until street has been accepted by County Public Works Department. 
m.  Maintain a minimum 2' of cover over storm pipes. All corrugated metal pipe to be maintained by county shall be full asphalt coated. Paved inverts are required in perennial streams. Pipe gage determined based on depth of cover and loading conditions. 
n.  Debris fills are strictly prohibited at all construction sites or within any development. All waste and construction debris generated from construction must be property disposed of in an appropriate landfill. 
o.  All street and stop signs must be installed prior to issuance of any building permits. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX H 
The Final Plat Shall Contain the Following Information: 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
1.  Show name of subdivision and former name (if any). 
2.  Revised plats — note previous recorded Plat Book and Page. 
3.  Give name, address and phone number owner/developer. 
4.  Show graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
5.  Provide a location/vicinity map showing relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
6.  State the total number of acres and number of lots. 
7.  State the zoning classification of the property. 
8.  Note zoning case number, date of approval, and all conditions of zoning on the plat (if applicable). 
9.  Show and note front, side and rear setbacks on plat. 
10.  Note minimum lot size requirement. 
11.  Show the layout of all lots, including front, side and rear building setback lines, scaled dimensions on lots and utility easements with width and use. 
12.  Show the proposed unit division, phase or stage development, if any. 
13.  Identify all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
14.  State names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions, and zoning of adjacent properties. 
15.  Show required buffer areas (if applicable). 
16.  If any variances were obtained for the property, note type of variance (and conditions) approved, note variance case number and date of approval (if applicable). 
17.  Provide final plan of water supply system (if applicable) with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and meter boxes. 
18.  Show all street names and street addresses. 
19.  Show name, location, right-of-way, dimension from centerline, pavement width and surface type of all streets and roads (and proposed roads) on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. 
20.  Show 10 foot "No Access Easement" along the rear of all double frontage lots. 
21.  Show relevant curve data in the form of a curve table on the plat. 
22.  Provide sufficient data to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every road line, boundary line, block line and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, central angle, and tangent distance for the centerlines of curved streets. Curved property lines shall show arc or chord distance and radii. 
23.  Show all dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
24.  Show location and description of monuments. 
25.  Provide computations showing closure of tract boundary, which closure shall be one (1) foot in 2500 feet or better. 
26.  Provide final plan of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlets, access and drainage easements. 
27.  State and show the 100-year flood plain limits and elevations, or note absence. Indicate Community Panel Number and date of panel referenced. Show/note lot FFE at 100-year elevation plus 2 vertical feet (if applicable). 
28.  State and show all areas that are subject to flooding due to High Water Line or Dam Break Zone of any proposed or existing lake(s) (if applicable). 
29.  Provide certification by a registered surveyor attesting to the accuracy of survey, plat, and placement of monuments. 
30.  Provide certification that the land owner dedicates roads, right-of-way and designated sites for public use. 
31.  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording. 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT INFORMATION 
1.  A high intensity Level Two soil survey or, if the soil conditions are complex and/or the exact positions of the inventoried soil's boundaries are critical for system replacement, a Level Three soil survey will be needed. 
2.  A signed/stamped copy of the final soil report with the level of the soil survey indicated on the report. 
3.  A copy of the soil narrative explaining the types of soils. 
4.  Two copies of the soil report overlayed onto the final plat. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX I 
_____
5.6.1  a.  Preliminary engineering certificate. 
PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING CERTIFICATE 
I hereby certify that this proposed preliminary plat correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on _______, 20_____, of the property shown and described hereon. 
BY _______ 
Registered C.E. No. _______ 
-or- 
BY _______ 
_____
5.6.1  b.  Certificate of Design. 
CERTIFICATE OF DESIGN 
I hereby certify that the design and layout of the proposed lots, houselots, blocks, streets, Greenspace lands, and other planned features included in this proposed preliminary plat have been prepared by me or under my direct supervision. I certify that the design and layout comply with the County's zoning and subdivision ordinances. Any modifications shall be noted on the plat. 
BY _______ 
Registered C.E. No. _______ 
-or- 
BY _______ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. _______ 
-or- 
BY _______ 
Registered Landscape Architect No. _____ of design: 
_____
5.6.1  c.  Safe Dams Certificate 
SAFE DAMS CERTIFICATE 
I hereby certify that this preliminary plat is a true representation of the results of an actual survey by me or under my supervision, conforming to the normal standards of care of professional surveyors practicing in the State of Georgia, and that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or is marked 'future' and that the surveying requirements for preliminary plats of the 'Development Regulations' and 'Zoning Regulations' of Carroll County, Georgia, have been fulfilled. I have also determined that this project is not within a dam breach zone of an existing Category II Dam as defined under the Georgia Safe Dams Act. 
By: _______ 
Registered Land Surveyor No. _______ 
Date: _______ 
OR: 
I hereby certify that this preliminary plat is a true representation of the results of an actual survey by me or under my supervision, conforming to the normal standards of care of professional surveyors practicing in the State of Georgia, and that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or is marked 'future' and that the surveying requirements for preliminary plats of the 'Development Regulations' and 'Zoning Regulations' of Carroll County, Georgia, have been fulfilled. I have also determined that this project is within a dam breach zone of an existing Category II Dam as defined under the Georgia Safe Dams Act and the following information as required under Section 38 of the Carroll County Code of Ordinances has been submitted for review by Carroll County and the Georgia Safe Dams Program. 
By: _______ 
Registered Land Surveyor No. _______ 
Date: _______ 
_____
5.6.1  d.  Application for plat improvements. 
APPLICATION FOR PLAT IMPROVEMENTS 
I hereby certify that no installation of improvements shall be made, and no work shall be commenced on this plat until the Certificate of Preliminary Plat Approval is in effect and until a Land Disturbance Permit pursuant to section 4.3 of these regulations has been issued by the director. It is understood that all improvements otherwise installed, or works otherwise commenced, will not be recognized by the Department of Community Development. 

 
_____
5.6.1  e.  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. 
CERTIFICATE OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL 
All requirements of the Carroll County Subdivision Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a preliminary plat having been fulfilled, approval by this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions said subdivision regulations, and the preliminary plat has fully complied with the Carroll County Zoning Resolution, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met. 
_______  Date of Approval  _______  Director, Community Development Dept. 
THIS CERTIFICATE EXPIRES _______ (date) 
PRELIMINARY PLAT - NOT TO BE RECORDED 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX J 
_____
5.6.2  a. The Final Engineering Certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
FINAL ENGINEERING CERTIFICATE 
It is hereby certified that the infrastructure constructed and dedicated to Carroll County in perpetuity on this plat, is true and correct and was prepared from an actual design made by me or under my supervision; that all infrastructure shown hereon actually exist or is marked as "Future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown and constructed following the principals and practices of sound engineering; and that all engineering requirements of the Carroll County Subdivision Regulations and the requirements of the Zoning Resolution have been fully complied with. 
By _______ Georgia F.E. No. _______ 
_____
5.6.2  b. Safe Dams Certificate (If applicable) 
SAFE DAMS CERTIFICATE 
I hereby certify that this final plat is a true representation of the results of an actual survey by me or under my supervision, conforming to the normal standards of care of professional surveyors practicing in the State of Georgia, and that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or is marked 'future' and that the surveying requirements for final plats of the 'Development Regulations' and 'Zoning Regulations' of Carroll County, Georgia, have been fulfilled. I have also determined that this project is within a dam breach zone of an existing Category II Dam as defined under the Georgia Safe Dams Act and the following information as required under Section 38 of the Carroll County Code of Ordinances has been submitted for review by Carroll County and the Georgia Safe Dams Program. 
By: _______ 
Registered Land Surveyor No. _______ 
Date: _______ 
_____
5.6.2  c. The Surveyor's Certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
It is hereby certified that this exemption plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future," and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown. 
By _______ Georgia R.L.S. No. _______ 
Date _______ 
_____
5.6.2  d. The Owner's Certificate 
OWNERS ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(CARROLL COUNTY) 
The owner of record of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, hereby acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, dedicates to Carroll County the complete ownership and use of all water improvements constructed or to be constructed in accordance with this plat, and dedicates to the use of the public forever the following: 
Public streets _______ Acres 
Public drainage easements _______ Acres 
Public sewer easements _______ Acres 
Public parks—Open spaces _______ Acres 
_______  Typed Name of Subdivider 
_______  Typed Name of Owner of Record 
_______  Signature of Subdivider 
_______  Signature of Owner of Record 
_____
5.6.2  e. The Flood Hazard Certificate 
FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE 
The Intermediate Regional Flood (I.R.F.) areas shown hereon where determined by the professional engineer whose stamp and signature are affixed hereto. Carroll County does not, by approving this plat, warrant their accuracy nor imply that land outside the areas of flood hazard shown will be free from flooding or flood damage. Further, Carroll County does not, by approving this plat nor accepting the public improvements, therein, assume maintenance of the flood carrying capacity of the flood area watercourses. Maintenance shall remain the responsibility of the owner/s of the land upon which they exist. The owner of a lot or parcel that contains a flood hazard area is required to submit a site plan to Carroll County prior to the initiation of any improvements to the lot or parcel. The site plan shall include the location and elevation of the I.R.F. within the lot or parcel and the existing and proposed improvements. Approval of the site plan by Carroll County is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
_____
5.6.2  f. The Drainage Certificate shall appear on all final plats. 
DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE 
The owner of record, on behalf of himself (itself) and all successors in interest specifically releases Carroll County from any and all liability and responsibility for flooding or erosion storm drains or from flooding from high water or natural creeks, river or drainage features. A drainage easement is hereby established for the sole purpose of providing for the emergency protection of the free flow of surface waters along all watercourses as established by these regulations and the director of the Department of Public Works. The director of the Department of Public Works may conduct emergency maintenance operations within this easement where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall be the removal of trees and other debris, excavation, filling and the like, necessary to remedy a condition, which in the judgement of the director of public works, is potentially injurious to life, property or the public roads or utility system. Such emergency maintenance, conducted for the common good, shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of Carroll County nor an abrogation of Carroll County's rights to seek reimbursement for expenses from the owner/s of the property/ies of the lands that generated the conditions. 
_____
5.6.2  g.  Specifications for Final Plats Involving Private Streets. 
PRIVATE STREET CERTIFICATION 
Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required in section 7.3.4. 
"WARNING, Carroll County has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private streets, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the general public purpose access and utility easement or easements for private streets shown on this plat." 
"Grant of Easement. The general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the County, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
_____
5.6.2  h.  Final Plats Involving Special Tax Districts. 
SPECIAL TAX DISTRICT CERTIFICATION 
Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required in section 7.3.4. 
The purchasers of the properties within this developments shall be hereby notified that this development is the subject of a special tax district for the purposes of providing _______ services. [Road Maintenance, Streetlights, or Greenspace Park]. 
The cost of providing services and maintenance within this District shall be borne by the owners of the property. Service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the Board of Commissioners. In setting or modifying such rates the Board shall establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of services and maintenance of facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom and will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and maintenance of facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for construction and necessary improvements to the district. 
_____
5.6.2  i.  Final plat approval. 
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL 
All requirements of the Carroll County Subdivision Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a final plat having been fulfilled, approval by this plat is hereby granted, subject to further provisions said subdivision regulations, and the plat has fully complied with the Carroll County Zoning Resolution, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met. 
_______  Date of Approval 
_______  Director, Community Development Dept. 
_____
5.6.2  i.  Certificate of Dedication 
CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION 
The following certificate of dedication shall be required, unless the Director or other authorized representative of Carroll County waives the dedication requirement. "Certificate of Dedication. All water and sewer lines installed within the general purpose public access and utility easement(s) shown on this plat for private street(s) are hereby dedicated to the Carroll County Water Authority. 
_______  Signature of Property Owner 
_____
5.6.2  j.  Current Note. Carroll County Department of Public Works 
CURRENT NOTE: CARROLL COUNTY PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Carroll County assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural drains beyond the extent of the street right of way or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded plat. 
_____
5.6.2  k.  Recording information 
Record: Filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Carroll County, Georgia. Plat Book No. _____, Page No. _____ 
_____
5.6.2  l.  Department Certification. 
Department Certification: 
___________ 
Carroll County Health Department/Date 
___________ 
Director, Carroll County Public Works Department/Date 
___________ 
Engineer, Carroll County Community Development Department/Date 
___________ 
Chairman, Carroll County Board of Commissioners/Date 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX K 
GUIDELINES FOR CONSTRUCTING MULTI-USE PATHS 
1.0 Introduction. The planning and design of multi-use paths must therefore take into account the various skills, experience and characteristics of these different users. 
1.1 Where Paths Are Appropriate. 
1.1.1 Well-planned and designed multi-use paths can provide good pedestrian and bicycle mobility. They can have their own alignment along streams and greenspace, or may be components of a community trail system. 
1.1.2 Paths can serve both commuter and recreational cyclists. A separated path provides a learning ground for potential bicycle commuters and can attract experienced cyclists who prefer an aesthetic ride. 
2.0 Components to a Multi-use Paths. 
2.0.1 Continuous separation from traffic, by locating paths along a river or a greenbelt such as a rail-to-trail conversion, with few street or driveway crossings (paths directly adjacent to roadways are not recommended, as they tend to have many conflict points); 
2.0.2 Scenic qualities, offering an aesthetic experience that attracts cyclists and pedestrians; 
2.0.3 Connection to land-uses, such as shopping malls, downtown, schools and other community destinations; 
2.0.4 Well-designed street crossings, with measures such as bike and pedestrian activated signals, median refuges and warning signs for both motor vehicles and path users; 
2.0.5 Shorter trip lengths than the road network, with connections between dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs, or as short-cuts through open spaces; 
2.0.6 Visibility: proximity to housing and businesses increases safety. Despite fears of some property owners, paths have not attracted crime into adjacent neighborhoods; 
2.0.7 Good design, by providing adequate width and sight distance, and avoiding problems such as poor drainage, blind corners and steep slopes; and 
2.0.8 Proper maintenance, with regular sweeping and repairs. The separation from motor vehicle traffic can reduce some maintenance requirements, such as sweeping the debris that accumulates on roads. 

Example of Multi-Use Paths 
2.0 IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS 
2.1 Crossings. The number of at-grade crossings with streets or driveways should be limited. Poorly designed crossings put pedestrians and cyclists in a position where motor vehicle drivers do not expect them at street crossings. 
2.2 Access. Limiting crossing must be balanced with providing access. If a path is to serve bicyclists and pedestrians well, there should be frequent and convenient access to the local road network. Access points that are spaced too far apart will require users to travel out of direction to enter or exit the path. The path should terminate where it is easily accessible to and from the street system, e.g. at a controlled intersection or at the end of a dead-end street. Directional signs direct users to and from the path. 
2.3 Security. Multi-use paths in secluded areas should be designed with personal security in mind. Illumination and clear sight distances improve visibility. Location markers, mileage posts and directional signing help users know where they are. Frequent accesses improve response time by emergency vehicles. 
2.4 Maintenance. Multi-use paths require special trips for inspection, sweeping and repairs. They must be built to a standard high enough that allows heavy maintenance equipment to use the path without deterioration. 
2.5 On-street Facilities. As bicyclists gain experience and realize some of the advantages of riding on the road, many stop riding on paths placed adjacent to roadways. This can be confusing to motorists, who may expect bicyclists to use the path. The presence of a nearby path should not be used as a reason to not provide adequate shoulders, bike lanes or sidewalks on the roadway. 
2.6 Standards. Paths intended for multiple use by commuters and recreationists should be built to a standard that accommodates the various users with minimal conflicts. Designing to a low standard to save money can lead to problems if the path is popular. If usage is expected to be low, the need for a path should be reconsidered. 
3.0 PATHS NEXT TO ROADWAYS 
3.1 Concerns. Multi-use paths should not be placed next to roadways; half of the bicycle traffic will ride against the normal flow of motor vehicle traffic, which is contrary to the rules of the road, with the following consequences for bicyclists. 
3.1.1 When the path ends, bicyclists riding against traffic tend to continue to travel on the wrong side of the street, as do bicyclists getting to a path. Wrong-way travel by bicyclists is a major cause of bicycle/automobile crashes and should be discouraged. 
3.1.2 At intersections, motorists crossing the path often do not notice bicyclists coming from certain directions, especially where sight distances are poor. 
3.1.3 Bicyclists on the path are required to stop or yield at cross-streets and driveways. Stopped motor vehicle traffic on a cross-street or driveway may block the path. 
3.1.4 Because of the closeness of motor vehicle traffic to opposing bicycle traffic, barriers are often necessary to separate motor vehicles and bicyclists. These barriers are obstructions, complicate maintenance of the facility and waste available right-of-way. 
3.2 Guidelines. Separated paths along roadways should be evaluated using the following guidelines: 
3.2.1 Bicycle and pedestrian use is anticipated to be high; 
3.2.2 The adjacent roadway is a heavily-traveled, high-speed thoroughfare where on-road bikeways and sidewalks may be unsafe; 
3.2.3 The path will generally be separated from motor vehicle traffic, with few roadway or driveway crossings; 
3.2.4 There are no reasonable alternatives for bikeways and sidewalks on nearby parallel streets; 
3.2.5 There is a commitment to provide path continuity throughout the corridor; 
3.2.6 The path can be terminated at each end onto streets with good bicycle and pedestrian facilities, or onto another safe, well-designed path; 
3.2.7 There is adequate access to local cross-streets and other facilities along the route. 
3.2.8 Any needed grade-separation structures do not add substantial out-of-direction travel; and 
3.2.9 The total cost of providing the proposed path is proportionate to the need. This evaluation should consider the costs of: 
a.  Grading, paving, drainage, fences, retaining walls, sound walls, signs and other necessary design features; 
b.  Structures needed to eliminate at-grade crossings; and 
c.  Additional maintenance, including the need for specialized maintenance equipment. 
Notes: in many cases, the best choice is to improve the roadway system to accommodate cyclists and pedestrians, which may require connecting up local streets or improving nearby, parallel streets. 
4.0 STANDARDS 
4.1 Width & Clearances. 
4.1.1 Width. 
a.  High Traffic 3 m (10 ft) is the standard width for a two-way multi-use path; they should be 3.6 m (12 ft) wide in areas with high mixed-use. Faster-moving bicyclists require greater width than pedestrians; optimum width should be based on the relative use by these two modes. High use by skaters may also require greater width. 
b.  Medium Traffic. The minimum width is 2.4m (8 ft). However, 2.4 m wide multi-use paths are not recommended in most situations because they may become over-crowded. They should only be constructed as short connectors, or where long-term usage is expected to be low, and with proper horizontal and vertical alignment to assure good sight distances. 
c.  One-way paths. Although one-way paths may be intended for one direction of bicycle travel, they will often be used as two-way facilities, especially by pedestrians. Caution must be used in selecting this type of facility. If needed, they should be 1.8 m (6 ft) wide (min. 1.5 m [5 ft]) and designed and signed to assure one-way operation by bicyclists. 
4.1.1 Lateral Clearance. A 1 m (3 ft) or greater (min. 0.6 m [2 ft]) "shy" or clear distance on both sides of a multi-use path is necessary for safe operation. This area should be graded to the same slope as the path to allow recovery by errant bicyclists. 
4.1.2 Overhead Clearance. The standard clearance to overhead obstructions is 3 m (10 ft), min. 2.4 m (8 ft). 
Multi-Use Path Standards 
[ 4.1.3 Reserved. ] 
4.1.4 Separation from Roadway. Where a path is parallel and adjacent to a roadway, there should be a 1.5 m (5 ft) or greater width separating the path from the edge of roadway, or a physical barrier of sufficient height should be installed (see 4.6, Railings, Fences and Barriers). 
4.2 Typical Pavement Sections. 
4.2.1 The use of concrete surfacing for paths is best for long-term use. Concrete provides a smooth ride when placed with a slip-form paver. The surface must be cross-broomed. The crack-control joints should be saw-cut, not troweled. Concrete paths cost more to build than asphalt paths, but long-term maintenance costs are lower, since they do not become as brittle, cracked and rough with age, or deformed by roots and weeds as does asphalt. 
4.2.2 Multi-use paths should be designed with sufficient surfacing structural depth for the subgrade soil type to support maintenance and emergency vehicles. If the path must be constructed over a very poor subgrade (wet and/or poor material), treatment of the subgrade with lime, cement or geotextile fabric should be considered. 
Multi-Use Path Pavement Structure 
4.3 Grades & Cross-Slope. AASHTO recommends a maximum grade of 5% for bicycle use, with steeper grades allowable for up to 150 m (500 ft.), provided there is good horizontal alignment and sight distance. Extra width is also recommended. Engineering judgment and analysis of the controlling factors should be used to determine what distance is acceptable for steep grades. 
4.3.1 If use by pedestrians is expected, ADA requirements must be met; the grade of separated pathways should not exceed 5%, to accommodate wheelchair users. 
4.3.2 Based on AASHTO recommendations and ADA requirements, 5% should be considered the maximum grade allowable for multi-use paths. 
4.3.3 The standard cross-slope grade is 2%, to meet ADA requirements and to provide drainage. Curves should be banked with the low side on the inside of the curve to help bicyclists maintain their balance. 
4.4 At-grade Crossings of Thoroughfares. 
4.4.1 At-grade crossings introduce conflict points, and grade separation should be sought, as most path users expect continued separation from traffic. The greatest conflicts occur where paths cross freeway entrance and exit ramps. Motorists using these ramps are seeking opportunities to merge with fast moving traffic; they are not expecting bicyclists and pedestrians at these locations. 
At-Grade Crossing of a Thoroughfare with Median Island 

Path Curves to Improve Visibility at Signalized Intersection 
4.4.2 When grade separation structures cannot be justified, signalization or other measures should be considered to reduce conflicts. Good sight distance must be provided so vehicle drivers can see approaching path users. One method is to provide a median island on multi-lane roadways as a refuge: 
Where a path must cross a roadway at an intersection, improvements to the alignment should be made to increase the visibility of approaching path users. One method is to curve the path slightly, so that it is not parallel to the adjacent roadway: 
4.5 Structures. 
4.5.1 The width of multi-use path structures is the same as the approach paved path, plus a 0.6 m (2 ft) shy distance on both sides. For example, a 3 m (10 ft) wide path requires a 4.2 m (14 ft) wide structure. 
Multi-Use Path Bridge 

Undercrossing Dimensions 
4.5.2 The standard overhead clearance of under-crossings is 3 m (10 ft); a 2.4 m (8 ft) min. may be allowable with good horizontal and vertical clearance, so users approaching the structure can see through to the other end. Undercrossings should be visually open for the personal security of users. Illumination is needed in areas of poor visibility. 
4.5.3. Under-crossings. 
a.  Advantages: They provide an opportunity to reduce approach grades, as the required 3 m (10 ft) clearance is less than the clearance required for crossing over a roadway. If the roadway is elevated, an undercrossing can be constructed with little or no grade. They are often less expensive to build. 
b.  Disadvantages: They may present security problems, due to reduced visibility. An open, well-lighted structure may end up costing as much as an over-crossing. They may require drainage if the sag point is lower than the surrounding terrain. 

Undercrossing Configurations 
4.5.4 Over-crossings Advantages: They are more open and present fewer security problems. 
Disadvantages: They require longer approaches to achieve the standard 5 m (17 ft) of clearance over most roadways. With an additional structural depth of 1 m (3 ft), the total rise will be 6 m (20 ft). At 5%, this requires a 120 m (400 ft) approach ramp at each end, for a total of 240 m (800 ft). This can be lessened if the road is built in a cut section. Note: 7m (23 ft) clearance is required over railroad tracks. 
Overcrossing Configurations 
4.6 Railings, Fences & Barriers. 
4.6.1 Fences or railings along paths may be needed to prevent access to high-speed highways, or to provide protection along steep side slopes and waterways. A height of 1 m (4.5 ft) keeps a cyclist from falling over the railing or fence. 
Railing with "Rub-Rail" 
4.6.2 Openings in the railing must not exceed 150 mm (6") in width. Where a cyclist's handlebar may come into contact with a fence or barrier, a smooth, wide rub-rail may be installed at a height of 1 m (3 ft). 
Adding Railing to a Barrier 
4.6.3 Where concrete barriers are used, adding tube railing or chain link fencing may be necessary to achieve the required height. 
"Cattle-chute" Effect 
4.6.4 Fences should only be used where they are needed for safety reasons. They should be placed as far away from the path as possible. Duplication of fences should be avoided, such as fences on the right-of-way and fences to keep pedestrians off freeways. 
4.6.5 Care must be taken to avoid a "cattle chute" effect by placing a high chain-link fence on each side of a path. 
4.7 Preventing Motor-Vehicle Access 
4.7.1 Geometric Design. One method branches the path into two narrower one-way paths just before it reaches the roadway, making it difficult for a motor vehicle to gain access to the path. 
Split Path Discourages Motor-Vehicle Access 
4.7.2 Short Curb Radii. Short curb radii (1.5 m [5 ft]) make it difficult for motorists to enter a path from the roadway. 
4.7.3 Bollards. Barrier posts ("bollards") may be used to limit vehicle traffic on paths. However, they are often hard to see and cyclists may not expect them. When used, they must be spaced wide enough (min. 1.5 m [5 ft]) for easy passage by cyclists and bicycle trailers as well as wheelchair users. A single bollard is preferred, as two may channelize bicyclists to the middle opening, creating conflicts. They should not be placed right at the intersection. They should be painted with bright, light colors for visibility. 
Short Curb Radius and Bollard at Entrance to a Path 
4.7.4 Signing. Standard signing is often sufficient to inform motorists. Refer to page 153 for signing recommendations. 
4.8 Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for bicycle access to multi-use paths should be built so they match the road grade without a lip. The width of the curb cut is the full width of the path when the approaching path is perpendicular to the curb and a minimum of 2.4 m (8 ft) wide when the approaching path is parallel and adjacent to the curb. Greater widths may be needed on downhill grades. 
Curb Cuts for Paths 
4.9 Drainage. Multi-use paths must be constructed with adequate drainage to avoid washouts and flooding, and to prevent silt from intruding onto the path. 
4.10 Vegetation. 
4.10.1 All vegetation, including roots, must be removed in the preparation of the subgrade. Special care is needed to control new growth, such as the use of soil sterilant or lime treatment of the subgrade. Plants that can cause other problems should be controlled, such as plants with thorns that can puncture bicycle tires. 
4.10.2 Paths built in wooded areas present special problems. The roots of shrubs and trees can pierce through the surface and cause it to bubble up and break apart. Preventive methods include removal of vegetation, realignment of the path away from trees, and placement of root barriers along the edge of the path. An effective barrier is created with a 300 mm (12") deep metal shield; greater depth is required for some trees such as cottonwoods. 
Path Adjacent to Trees 
4.11 Paths with Heavy Use. If a path must handle a high number of users, it should be wider than standard (3.6 m or more). A separate soft-surface jogger or equestrian path may be constructed with bark mulch alongside the paved path. 
Multi-Use Path with Additional Jogger/Equestrian Way 
4.12 Stairways. Where a connection is needed to a destination or another path at a different elevation, a stairway can be used where the terrain is too steep for a path. A grooved concrete trough should be provided so bicyclists can easily push their bicycles up or down. 
Stairway Provides Easy Access for Bicycles and Pedestrians 
Note: Stairways are usually provided as a shortcut and do not meet ADA requirements; the destination should also be accessible along a flatter route, even if this route is longer and more circuitous. 
Shared-Use Trails, Paved-Tread, Double-Track 
Where paved service roads exist, this is the standard trail. The trails should be built out to this standard. 
Shared-Use Trails, Natural Tread, Double-Track 
Where no paved road exists, this is the standard trail. 
Limited-Use Trails, Natural Tread, Single-Track 
Single-track trails should be used only when space constraints prohibit a double-track trail. Generally this occurs only on trails cut out of hillsides. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
APPENDIX L 
WOODLANDS MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE 
1  The intention of this section is to provide regulations for forest management within conservation subdivisions and provide guidelines for design to defend against wildfire. 
2  Registered or consulting foresters 1 [] shall provide technical assistance in all phases of forest management and prepare a natural resource management plan. The plan should be based upon an ecosystem-based management approach whenever possible and/or upon the objectives of the county to include wildfire protection of threatened communities in the wildland/urban interface. The Forest Stewardship guidelines will be followed for the objectives of timber production, wildlife habitat, aesthetics, recreation, conservation or equal emphasis on all of the objectives mentioned, insofar as the size of the land area will allow such management objectives to be realistic options. The Stewardship designation (for properties that qualify) will be an objective of the management plan. 
2.1  The elements of the management plan shall include, but not be limited to, resource assessment of the forest lands and the objectives to be obtained, wildlife management, recreational activities, and management constraints or options. The plan should assess the risk from wildfire based upon fuels and weather, to include the following areas; thinning, planting, herbicide application, prescribed burns, forest inventory, forest health, and wildlife habitat improvement. 
2.2  Wildfire risk shall analyze adjacent land uses, vegetation/ecosystem type, fuel management, and prepare an emergency wildfire management plan based upon fire behavior, fuel breaks and water sources, evacuation plans, and designated safety zones. 
2.2.1  The wildfire management plan should provide for a defensible space around the development. The wildfire plan should include the following: 
a.  If practical, a 150-foot-wide area of shrub islands and thinned trees along any edges of the subdivision adjacent to fire-prone undeveloped land. 
b.  A fuels removal plan (by prescribed fire or mechanical means), including ongoing fuel reduction measures (burning, mowing, thinning) in greenspace and rights-of-way management plans. 
c.  A 20-foot cleared and perpetually maintained permanent firebreak with clearance on access paths to within 10 feet of water features for heavy fire-fighting equipment use. 
d.  A defensible space that may include: 
(1)  Trees and shrubs that provide shade and attract wildlife. 
(2)  A canopy of large trees while reducing the ground-level vegetative fuels that can carry a fire. 
(3)  Less flammable plants may be substituted to gain fire prevention, water conservation, and wildlife habitat benefits. 
(4)  Ponds, wetlands, streets, utility corridors, and mowed areas may serve as fuel breaks. 
3  Greenspace should be one large contiguous tract rather than scattered small areas. This provides for more efficient fuel management, better wildlife habitat, and development of a recreational area for residents. 
4  A pre-construction prescribed burn (conducted in compliance with applicable EPD burning restrictions), installation of permanent firebreaks and walking trails and thinning of pine trees should be conducted under the supervision of the forester or the local permitting agency. 
5  It is recommended that the community covenants and restrictions, include wildfire prevention measures to govern the appropriate placement of structures, management of vegetation, maintenance of defensible space, burning of yard waste, and fire-wise structures. Fire-wise structures shall avoid using combustible or heat-sensitive building materials such as vinyl or wood siding and soffits, vinyl soffit vents, or wood shingles. Brick, concrete, rock, stucco, or metal (roofing or screen soffit vents) are preferred building materials for homes adjacent to fire-prone undeveloped areas. Spark-arresting screens should be placed on chimneys, hose bibs should be on all sides of the structure, and a 30 feet fire-safe area established around the dwelling for combustible items such as propane tanks, woodpiles, or flammable materials. 
(Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Foresters should have proper educational background from an institute accredited by the Society of American Foresters, proper experience, be registered to practice forestry in Georgia and be affiliated with the Association of Consulting Foresters or another similar professional association. 

Chapter 90 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; excise tax for alcoholic beverage sales, § 6-3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58. 
Related laws reference— Homestead exemptions, art. VI. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Timber tax. 
Standing timber shall be assessed for ad valorem taxation only once, and such assessment shall be made following its harvest or sale, as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5. The provisions in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5 shall govern all timber harvesting operations in the county. 
Cross reference— Timber harvesting, § 38-46 et seq. 
Sec. 90-2. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The resolution adopted March 26, 1979, imposing a joint city-county local sales and use tax, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Sec. 90-3. - Delinquent tax payers—Issuance of licenses and permits to; doing business with. 
It shall be the policy of the county board of commissioners to restrict the issuance of all (new and/or renewal) licenses and permits, including building permits, conditional use permits, zoning requests and business licenses, within the county to individuals and/or businesses with delinquent county fines or taxes, including any property taxes and personal taxes, until all taxes or fines are paid. 
It shall also be the policy of the commission to prohibit the county government from doing business with individuals, businesses, and vendors with delinquent county taxes, until all taxes or fines are paid. 
(Ord. of 11-2-97; Mo. of 4-11-00; Res. of 1-18-05, § 1) 
Sec. 90-4. - Chairman of board of commissioners authorized to evaluate claims for refunds and creditors. 
The board of commissioners hereby authorizes its chairman to meet in conference with any taxpayer and render a decision to approve or disapprove any taxpayer request for refund/credit under $12,500.00. The board of commissioners further authorizes its chairman to execute and deliver all necessary instruments and otherwise to perform all acts necessary to accomplish the intent of this resolution. 
(Ord. of 11-19-02, § 1) 
Secs. 90-5—90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS 

Sec. 90-26. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for the year 1983, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Ord. of 8-4-83, § 1) 
Secs. 90-27—90-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 90-46. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Ord. of 11-2-83, § 1) 
Sec. 90-47. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 90-46 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-2-83, § 2) 
Sec. 90-48. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Ord. of 11-2-83, § 3) 
Sec. 90-49. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 90-48 unless extended by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 11-2-83, § 4) 
Secs. 90-50—90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION 

Sec. 90-71. - Enumeration of exempt tangible personal property. 
There shall be exempt from county ad valorem taxation 100 percent of the following described tangible personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in this state. This exemption shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within this state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. This exemption shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. 
(Ord. of 12-14-93) 
Secs. 90-72—90-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 90-91. - Scope of tax. 
After January 1, 1990, the board of commissioners or its designee is authorized to levy and collect an excise tax upon the furnishings for value to the public of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the county for operating within the county a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. No tax shall be levied upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. No tax shall be levied upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 2-8-90, § I) 
Sec. 90-92. - Enforcement of article; citations; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to be in violation of this article. The county board of commissioners or its designee shall have the power to issue citations for failure to comply with this article. Penalties may include a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per day of violation of this article and may also include injunctive relief against any person or legal entity. 
(Ord. of 2-8-90, § V) 
Sec. 90-93. - Tax rate. 
All persons or legal entities affected by this article shall pay a tax at the rate of six percent of the gross receipts received for the furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. This amount shall exclude those amounts received under the exceptions in section 90-91. 
(Ord. of 2-8-90, § II) 
Sec. 90-94. - Use of tax. 
(a)  The county shall expend (in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected an amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes collected exceed the taxes which would be collected at a rate of three percent for the purpose of: 
(1)  Promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows; 
(2)  Supporting a facility owned or operated by a state authority within the county for convention and trade show purposes or any other similar or related purposes; or 
(3)  For some combination of such purposes. 
Amounts so expended shall be expended only through a contract or contracts with the state, a department of state government, a state authority, a convention and visitors bureau authority created by local Act of the General Assembly for a municipality, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or through a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities. 
(b)  In addition to the amounts otherwise required to be expended under paragraph (a), the county shall further expend in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected an amount equal to 16 2/3 percent of the total taxes collected at the rate of six percent for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows. Amounts so expended shall be expended only through a contract or contracts with the state, a department of state government, a state authority, a convention and visitors bureau authority created by local Act of the General Assembly for a municipality, or a private sector nonprofit organization, or through a contract or contracts with some combination of such entities. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "private sector, nonprofit organization" shall be a chamber of commerce, a convention and visitors bureau, a regional travel association, or any other private group organized for similar purposes with is exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the power of the county to expend more than the required amounts, or all of the total taxes collected under this section for the purposes described above. 
(Ord. of 2-8-90, § III; Res./Ord. of 6-21-05, § 1) 
Sec. 90-95. - Allowance of percentage collected as deduction. 
Each person collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-8-90, § IV) 
Secs. 90-96—90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 90-101. - Creation of special tax district. 
There is hereby created and established special districts for the provision of services within such districts. Fees, assessments, and taxes may be levied and collected within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein and to construct and maintain facilities therefor. 
(1)  Purpose for special tax district. The special districts shall be created for the following purposes: 
a.  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, and devices to control the flow of traffic; 
b.  Streetlights; 
c.  Stormwater retention or detention facilities; or 
d.  Parks, recreational areas, programs, and facilities comprising greenspace lands. 
(2)  Creation of tax district. When a service or maintenance of a facility, which is identified by this article, is requested by existing residents or in situations where the county board of commissioners by a majority vote, makes an independent determination that a service or maintenance of a facility which is identified by this article is in the best interest of the county and necessary for the protection of the health, safety and/or welfare of persons or properties within a designated area or areas, the board of commissioners is authorized to create a special tax district to fund the service or maintenance of said facility through the following procedures: 
a.  In situations where the request for service or maintenance of a facility through the creation of a special tax district is initiated by a request from existing residents, then these residents may request the creation of a special tax district to fund the service or maintenance of said facility by compliance with the following: 
1.  Any owner of land in any unincorporated area of the county may present a written request for the creation of a tax district to the director of the department of community development. 
2.  Application fee. Application fee shall be $75.00 plus $5.00 per lot within the development to be served by the special tax district. In addition, where the application is for the purpose of maintaining public improvements as set forth under subsection (1), the application shall tender in advance a sum equal to the customary rates charged by the appropriate service provider for similar services for a period of the following: 
(i)  Reserved. 
(ii)  Where the purpose of the application is for streetlights, the applicant shall tender a deposit equal to two years of service/utility payments. 
3.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall delineate the appropriate boundaries of the tax district, prepare a sketch or plat showing the proposed tax district, and prepare a petition for the establishment of a special tax district for circulation among the property owners in the proposed special tax district. The required petition shall be available in the department of community development. 
4.  If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed special tax district sign the petition for the creation of a tax district, the petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall then conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special tax district, giving consideration to health, safety, and welfare concerns. Unless 100 percent of the lot owners sign the petition, the public hearing shall be advertised one time in the official organ of the county more than 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing, and at least one sign shall be posted in the proposed tax district giving notice of the hearing, at least 15 days before the public hearing. It shall be the responsibility of the residents of the area in which the creation of a special tax district has been requested to secure the signatures on the petitions as outlined herein. The director shall verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearing. 
5.  It shall be the landowner's responsibility to construct, install, and equip the facility and make any initial improvements at their cost. 
6.  Improvements shall be installed on property where the county has title to land (for special tax districts involving streetlights in new subdivisions, the provisions of ch. 86, subdivisions, art. VII., subsection 86-125(e) shall apply). 
b.  In situations where the county board of commissioners by a majority vote has made an independent determination that the creation of a special tax district in a designated area or areas is in the best interest of the county and necessary to protect the health, safety and/or welfare of the persons or properties within a designated area or areas, the creation of a special tax district is subject to compliance with the following provisions: 
1.  Upon majority vote of the county board of commissioners, the director of the department of community development or his designate shall delineate the appropriate boundaries of the proposed special tax district, and prepare a sketch or plat showing the proposed special tax district for circulation among the property owners in the proposed special tax district. 
2.  The board of commissioners shall then conduct a public hearing for the purposes of receiving input on whether or not to create the proposed special tax district. The public hearing shall be advertised one time in the official organ of the county more than 15 days prior to the public hearing but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. 
3.  At least one sign shall be posted in the proposed tax district giving notice of the public hearing at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
4.  The director of the department of community development shall mail or cause to be mailed to the address of the owner of any piece of property contained within or affected by the proposed special tax district correspondence as set forth herein. The correspondence shall be mailed to the owner/owners of the properties contained within or affected by the special tax district utilizing the addresses for said owners as contained on the tax records of the office of the county tax commissioner. The correspondence shall advise the owners of property located within or affected by the proposed special tax district of the anticipated creation of the special tax district, the purpose of the special tax district, the required deposits and other charges associated with the creation of this special tax district, the method of payment or collection of fees associated with services or facilities provided as a result of the special tax district, and the date and time of the public hearing, as advertised, for a determination of whether or not to create the special tax district. This correspondence shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
5.  Where the purpose of the special tax district is streetlights, the residents shall tender a deposit equal to two years of service/utility payments. 
6.  It shall be the landowner's responsibility to construct, install and equip the facility and make any initial improvements at their cost. 
7.  Improvements shall be installed on property where the county has title to land (for special tax districts involving streetlights in new subdivisions, the provisions of ch. 86, subdivisions, art. VII, subsection 86-125(e) shall apply. 
(3)  Register. There is created hereby special tax districts that shall be identified by a number assigned by department and tax assessor's office. Each tax district shall be comprised of subdivided lands and shall contain the tax parcel numbers of each lot contained there. A register of tax districts shall be maintained in the office of tax assessor and the community development department. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(4)  Collection. The charges for service in each district shall be paid as a district tax, and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot or lot resident within each tax district. The office of the tax commissioner shall be responsible for the collection of the tax assessed to each tax district. 
(5)  Approval of board of commissioners. Upon the recommendation of the staff, the board of commissioners shall approve or deny the creation of the special tax district. The special tax district shall be effective upon approval by the board of commissioners and the effective date shall be set forth on the final plat. When each requirement of this article is completed, and the board of commissioners approves the creation of the special tax district, the county will assume the responsibility and make the periodic payments to the utility company or service provider for services rendered. 
(6)  Authority to contract with utility, service providers, and other parties. The board of commissioners may contract with the public utilities, and other parties supplying labor, materials, and construction services for the purposes of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-19-02, § 1; Ord. of 3-18-08, § 3) 
Sec. 90-102. - Service charges. 
(a)  Determination and modification of service charges. 
(1)  The cost of providing services and maintenance under this article shall be borne by the owners of the property within the special tax district receiving that service. Service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the board of establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of services, maintenance of facilities, or cost of improvements to those properties who benefit therefrom and will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted projects, services and maintenance of facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for construction and necessary improvements to the district. 
(2)  In the event of excessive vandalism to improvements within the special tax district that results in a county being billed for repairs, the county may pro-rate these repair bills and add a pro-rata share of these bills to the charge. Charges shall be assessed against all lots within the special tax district whether or not the lot is located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision, so long as the lot is located within the boundaries of the special tax districts. 
(b)  Lien created. In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the county shall have the rights available under the laws of the state for assessment, the creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided together with all rights of execution, levy foreclosure and sale. 
(c)  Deposit required; forfeiture. In addition to the other charges authorized under this article, the county shall have the right to require deposits from the lot owners receiving the service in such amount as shall be determined by the board of commissioners in subsection 90-101(2)a.2.(ii) or 90-101(2)b.5. as appropriate. This deposit shall be held by the county as security for payment for services rendered, and the county shall have the authority to set off service charges against the deposit for nonpayment for services at such times and on such occasions as shall be determined by the county. Notice of such setoff shall be given to the lot owner by mail at the address of the property services by the streetlights, although advance notice of such setoff shall not be required. In the event of a reduction in the deposit of a property owner because of failure to pay charges assessed pursuant to this article, the lot owner shall be required to restore the deposit to its required level upon request by the county. 
(d)  Service charges. The following rates shall apply: 
(1)  Dwellings units. Each attached and each detached dwelling unit shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit according to the rate schedule that is adopted by the board of commissioners, that schedule may be amended or modified in the future. 
(2)  Subdivided lands. All subdivided lands within the district that are not deed restricted from constructing or installing a dwelling unit shall be charged at a rate of one equivalent residential unit multiplied by the number of dwelling units on the respective subdivided parcel of land. 
(3)  Administrative service charge rate. The administration of the services herein provided and for all billing and accounting shall be the responsibility of the board of commissioners. An administrative fee that is related to an amount necessary to defer necessary expenses related to the administration of this article shall be set by the board of commissioners and added to each tax bill. 
(e)  Service charges, billing, delinquencies. A charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from the public land records of the county, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the county may backbill for a period of up to four years, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A one and one-half percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any service that becomes delinquent. 
(f)  Service charges billed in common. The service charge maybe billed on a common statement and collected along with other county taxes and services. 
(g)  Appeals. Any customer who believes the provision of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner. 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the director of department of community development. In the case of service charge appeals, the appellant shall include sufficient information to conduct a review of the service charge. 
(2)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the director shall conduct a review of the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal, the director may adjust the service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  A decision of the director that is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the chairman of the board of commissioners within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the chairman of the board of commissioners by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the chairman of the board of commissioners shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(5)  All decisions by the chairman of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(6)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the chairman of the board of commissioners may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the superior court of the county, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(h)  Conflict of laws. If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(i)  No waiver. It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the unincorporated boundaries of the county. The county expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the county, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the county as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the county, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the county or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the county, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. of 5-19-02, § 1; Res./Ord. of 3-18-08, § 4) 
Secs. 90-103—90-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM 

Sec. 90-111. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners and Carrollton City Council have found that there is a need for revitalization in certain areas of the county and the City of Carrollton. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within the county and the City of Carrollton, which are suffering from disinvestment, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This article should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
(b)  The eligibility requirements contained herein are the minimum necessary to consider granting an application to participate in the enterprise zone program. The fact that an area or business may meet such eligibility requirements shall not entitle any such area, business or applicant to an enterprise zone designation or to additional incentives. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-112. - Criteria and boundaries of area-wide enterprise zones. 
(a)  In order to be designated as an enterprise zone, a nominated area shall meet at least three of the four criteria specified in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of the enabling legislation. Creation of an enterprise zone shall be consistent with the county and City of Carrollton comprehensive plans, as amended. In determining whether an area suffers from poverty, unemployment, or general distress, the county board of commissioners and the city council of Carrollton shall use data from the most current United States decennial census and from other information published by the Federal Bureau of the Census, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics and the state department of labor. In determining whether an area suffers from underdevelopment, the county board of commissioners and city council of Carrollton shall use the data specified in subsection (e) of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6. This data shall be comparable in point or period of time and methodology employed. 
(b)  Pervasive poverty shall be evidenced by showing that poverty is widespread throughout the nominated area and shall be established by using the following criteria: 
(1)  The proverty rate shall be determined from the data in Table P121 contained in the Census of Population and Housing, 1990: Summary Tape File 3A, on CD-ROM (Georgia), prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Census (1992); 
(2)  For each census geographic block group within the nominated area, the ratio of income to poverty level for at least 20 percent of the residents shall be less than 1.0; 
(3)  In at least 50 percent of the census geographic block groups within the nominated area, the ratio of income to poverty level for at least 30 percent of the residents shall be less than 1.0; 
(4)  Census geographic block groups with no population shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets the standards of paragraph (2) of this subsection but shall be treated as having a zero poverty rate for the purpose of applying paragraph (3) of this subsection; and 
(5)  All parcels of a nominated area must abut and may not contain a noncontiguous parcel, unless nonabutting parcel qualifies separately under the criteria set forth under paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. 
(c)  Unemployment shall be evidenced by the use of data published by the office of labor information systems of the state department of labor indicating that the average rate of unemployment for the nominated area for the preceding calendar year is at least ten percent higher than the state average rate of unemployment or by evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the nominated area such as the closing of a manufacturing plant or federal facility. 
(d)  General distress shall be evidenced by adverse conditions within the nominated area other than those of pervasive poverty and unemployment. Examples of such adverse conditions include, but are not limited to, a high incidence of crime, abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure, and substantial population decline. 
(e)  Underdevelopment shall be evidenced by data indicating development activities, or lack thereof, through land disturbance permits, business license fees, building permits, development fees, or other similar data indicating that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than other development activity within the county and the City of Carrollton. 
(f)  The county board of commissioners and Carrollton city council find that based on evidence, the area contained in the enterprise zone delineated in exhibit A satisfies at least three of the four criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and constitutes the enterprise zone(s) of the county and City of Carrollton, to be known as "West Carrollton Enterprise District". 
(g)  The designees of the county board of commissioners and the city shall report designations of enterprise zones to the state department of community affairs, providing such sufficient information to identify at a minimum the geographic boundaries of the zone(s), the specific fees and taxes to be exempted, and the beginning and ending dates of the designation period. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Ad valorem tax shall mean property taxes levied for state or county operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation, or special revenue bond debt. 
Business enterprise means any business that is engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development industries, finance, insurance, and real estate activities, new residential construction, and residential rehabilitation. 
Comprehensive plan means the county comprehensive plan, as amended from time to time, adopted by the board of commissioners which divides the unincorporated areas of the county into land use categories and which constitutes the official policy of the county regarding long-term planning and use of land, as defined in the chapter 90 of this Code (zoning ordinance of the county). 
Enterprise zone means the geographic areas of census tracts designated in exhibit A. 
Full-time job equivalent means a job or position with no predetermined end date, with a regular workweek of 30 hours or more, and with same benefits provided to other similar employees. 
Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person who, at the time of hire is: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance to needy families at any time during the 18 months prior to the date or hire; 
(5)  A participant in the job training partnership act program or who is participating in the job training partnership act program at any time during the 18 months prior to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity or training program where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity or training program at any time during the 18 months prior to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
Qualified or qualifying business means an employer that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4, including a service enterprise, which increased employment by five or more new full-time job equivalents in an area designated as an enterprise zone, and which provides additional economic stimulus in such zone. The quality or quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the local governing body or bodies that have designated the enterprise zone. Additional considerations and requirements are outlined in exhibit B. Such business or service enterprise may be new, an expansion or reinvestment of an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. Whenever possible, ten percent of such new employees shall be low-income or moderate-income individuals. 
Rehabilitation means the making of improvements to an existing structure such that the value of the improvements made to the structure exceeds the present appraised value of the land, as determined by the county tax assessor or City of Carrollton Tax Assessor, on which the structure is situated by a factor of five to one. 
Service enterprise means any entity that is engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-114. - Qualifications and incentives. 
(a)  To encourage revitalization within the designated enterprise zone, the following exemptions schedule for state, county, and city ad valorem taxes are available to qualifying business and service enterprises: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the state, county and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next two years (sixth and seventh years); 
(3)  Sixty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (eighth year); 
(4)  Forty percent of the state, city, and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (ninth year); and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the last year (tenth year). 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-88-7(a)(1), the county board of commissioners and/or the Carrollton City Council may offer the following additional economic incentives if annually the board of commissioners and city council determine that such incentives are to be provided: 
(1)  Building permit fees; 
(2)  Sign permit fees; 
(3)  Business license fees; 
(4)  Rezoning fees; 
(5)  Engineering fees; 
(6)  Water and sewer tap fees; 
(7)  Other local fees authorized by the council and/or board. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall authorize the county, Carrollton or their designated agents to waive, amend, provide exceptions to or otherwise modify or alter any ordinance that is expressly required to implement or enforce any statutory provisions or is designed to protect persons against discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, or handicap. 
(d)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise located within the enterprise zone or any business designated as eligible for enterprise zone advantages and incentives, the schedule provided for above shall begin in any year during which an area has an enterprise zone designation. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as giving any business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. 
(e)  If, on or after the effective date of this article, a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation and improvement of an existing structure and the value of said improvements exceeds the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land by a ratio of five to one (5:1), as determined by the county tax assessor or the Carrollton tax assessor, then the exemption schedule above shall also apply to the property whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this paragraph shall commence on the first day of the year following designation of the project as a qualifying project under this paragraph. However, this designation shall not be granted until the rehabilitation project has been completed and the county tax assessor or city tax assessor confirms its value. 
(f)  In no event shall the total value of the property tax exemptions granted within enterprise zones within the county and the city as a whole exceed ten percent of the value of the entire property tax digest of the county or the city. 
(g)  The enterprise zone designation shall run with the qualifying business or service enterprise and not with the land. Therefore, the designation shall apply only to the entity granted the designation through an application to the county and the city under this article. 
(h)  A business or service making application to receive enterprise zone tax exemptions and incentives shall have a right to appeal any denial of the application to the county board of commissioners and the city council. The request for appeal shall be filed with the director, the county attorney and the clerk of the county board of commissioners within seven days of the date of denial of the application for tax exemption. The county board of commissioners shall render a final decision on the appeal within 90 days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-115. - Duration. 
(a)  The area herein designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following its designation as an enterprise zone. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year schedule established above, regardless of the termination of the designation of an enterprise zone. 
(b)  Any areas designated as an enterprise zone may be redesignated as an enterprise zone if the area continues to meet the criteria for an enterprise zone contained in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-116. - Administration. 
(a)  A joint committee comprised of two city representatives, two county representatives, and a jointly appointed chairperson shall be designated to manage the implementation and enforcement of the West Carrollton Enterprise District Program; develop and accept applications; oversee zone activities and administration and communicate with qualified business. The committee shall grant designations consistent with the purposes and intent of this article and state law. 
(b)  The committee shall have the power to administer, require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article, and issue such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereafter, including, but not limited to, that such reports, data and information be submitted from such businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article. 
(c)  Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners and the city council of Carrollton by the committee annually. At the conclusion of each year, the committee will prepare a comprehensive report including, but not limited to the following enterprise zone evaluation tools: jobs created, amount of capital invested in the enterprise zone and the amount of taxes exempted. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-117. - Application. 
(a)  An entity desiring designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" under this article must apply to the committee. An application fee in an amount to be determined by the committee shall be required. In addition to other information requested by the county and the city, the following items shall accompany the application: 
(1)  A description of business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting the number of full-time job equivalents maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents maintained as of the effective date of this article, and the projected number of full-time job equivalents three years after the proposed investment; 
(3)  Description and documentation of any additional economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant; 
(4)  A legal description of the property; 
(5)  Documentation reflecting expenses or rehabilitation of the existing structure; 
(6)  Data from the county tax assessor or city tax assessor reflecting the value of the structure both before and after rehabilitation; 
(7)  Data from the county tax assessor or city tax assessor reflecting the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land both before and after rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(8)  Photographic documentation of the structure both before and after rehabilitation. 
(b)  Falsification of documents, failure to develop the project or comply with any provision of this article may result in revocation of any designation granted and recapture of any and all incentives granted to any such qualifying business. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-118. - Business location. 
Where a business is operated at more than one location, only the locations within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Sec. 90-119. - Record of exemption; contractual agreement. 
(a)  Any location for which the tax exemptions provided in this article have been granted shall maintain documentation relating to the grant of said exemptions at the address for which the exemptions were approved. 
(b)  As a condition of receiving tax exemptions provided for in this article, a qualifying business or service enterprise shall enter into a contractual agreement with the county and the city that specifies the tax exemptions and any additional incentives offered to such business or service enterprise, and the amount of capital to be invested by the business, and the square footage of improvements or units of housing to be constructed or rehabilitated. Guidelines for the recapture, revocation or reimbursement of taxes shall also be included in the terms of the contractual agreement in the event that this article or the Georgia Enterprise Zone Act is violated by the business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Secs. 90-120—90-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SALE, USE, STORAGE, OR CONSUMPTION OF ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 90-131. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer," "energy," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 (or any successor statute). 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-132. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-133. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  (1)  The rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of the county shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent; however, this two percent limitation shall not apply in a municipality that levies a water and sewer projects and costs tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-200 et seq., in which case there shall be a three percent limitation. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-134. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of the county by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-135. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county, or the collecting officer appointed under Section 90-138, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. An energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article if the purchaser has failed to submit such uniform exemption certificate to the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-136. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on October 1, 2017, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of the county monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-137. - Allocation, distribution, and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of the county at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by the county shall be paid into the general fund of the county to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Carroll County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Carroll County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of the county and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a), proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of the county may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 90-138. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of the county shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. The county's finance director is hereby designated as the collecting officer. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2017(1)) 
EXHIBIT A 
Carroll County Enterprise Zone Boundaries 
The above map delineates the boundaries of the Carroll County Enterprise Zone, and conincides with the boundaries of the following census block groups, which qualify for designation as a state enterprise zone: 1990 Tract 9905, Block Groups 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 (2000 Tract 9905.01, Block Groups 1, 2, and 2000 Tract 9905.02 Block Groups 1, 2 and 3) 
EXHIBIT B  ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONDITIONS 
Additional Considerations 
The Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997 Section 36-88-4(b) empowers the local governing body to make a case-by-case determination of the eligibility of each business for enterprise zone tax abatements and other incentives. Among the considerations may be the following: 
A.  The value of the business to the economic health and well-being of Carroll County and the City of Carrollton. 
B.  Capital investment or reinvestment by the business equal to or greater than the amount of ad valorem tax abated over the first five years of the tax incentive. 
C.  Consideration for meeting some or all of the following criteria: 
a.  Locating in a vacant building 
b.  Demolishing a pre-existing or abandoned structure 
c.  Assembling four or more tract of land for one project 
d.  Creating jobs above the state threshold 
e.  Incorporating aesthetic enhancements (i.e.: landscaping, type of facade materials used, exclusion of billboards) 
Additional Conditions for Qualification: Aesthetic Enhancements 
In order to enhance the aesthetic character of the Enterprise Zone area, all projects receiving tax exemptions must incorporate, and maintain for the duration of the tax exemption period, one of the following options (these options are minimum guidelines and projects may incorporate more extensive measures): 
Option A - Landscaping 
A fifteen-foot wide landscaped strip containing a minimum of three canopy trees or six small trees per 100 linear feet and 25 shrubs and/or ornamental grasses per 100 linear feet must be installed adjacent to all property lines adjacent to the public right-of-way. Canopy tree species used shall have an average nature crown spread of at least 25 feet when grown in Carroll County, GA. Trees must be at least four feet in height and have a caliper of at least 1½ inches immediately after planting. In order to maximize the survival chances of the tree, no paving shall be allowed within 12½ feet of the tree's trunk. Shrubs and ornamental grasses shall be a minimum of 12 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Trees of a species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than twelve feet to such public works. A list of suggested tree, shrub, and ornamental grass species will be provided. 
Ground cover must also be provided throughout the landscaped strip to minimize potential soil erosion. If grass is used, it shall be of a species normally grown as permanent lawns in the vicinity of Carroll County, GA. Mulch must be confined to areas underneath plants and is not a substitute for ground cover plants. Ground covers shall be planted in a manner to present a finished appearance within six months after planting. Grass area may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. 
Installation 
Plantings must be installed to current nursery industry standards. Plant materials must be properly supported to ensure survival. Support devises such as guy wires or stakes must not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement and must be removed as soon as the plant can support itself. 
Areas for required landscaping shall not be used as a waste dump or fill during the construction process. All waste materials shall be removed from areas to be landscaped prior to the application of topsoil. Soils devoid of organic materials shall not be utilized as topsoil for required landscape areas. Where such areas have been excavated to soil levels containing no organic material, the landscape plan shall provide for the placement of topsoil of a depth sufficient to ensure plant survival. 
All plantings that die or are destroyed must be replaced in kind within three months. 
Irrigation 
To ensure that plants will survive the critical establishment period when they are most vulnerable due to lack of watering, all required landscaped areas must proved either a permanent built-in irrigation system with an automatic controller; or an irrigation system designed as part of the Landscape Plan, which provides sufficient water to ensure that plants will become established. The system does not have to be permanent if the plants chosen can survive adequately on their own once established. 
Option B - Facade Materials/Landscaping 
If the building facade(s) visible from the public right-of-way is (are) constructed exclusively of brick, masonry, glass, or wood (or a combination of these materials), the landscaping requirement shall be a four-foot wide strip containing evergreen shrubs and/or ornamental grasses planted no further than three feet apart adjacent to the main entrance of the building and continuing for at least 20 feet on both sides of the main entrance door, or to the edge of the facade, whichever is less. Shrubs and ornamental grasses shall be a minimum of 12 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. 
The installation and irrigation requirements are the same as Option A. 
Additional Aesthetic Enhancement Requirement 
Projects receiving tax exemptions must exclude billboards from their property for the duration of the tax exemption period. 
(Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1) 
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; civil emergencies, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses, ch. 66; roads and bridges, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4). 

Sec. 94-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as the traffic regulations of the county with the same effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-13. 
Sec. 94-2. - Entering or staying upon restricted intersections; exceptions; enforcement. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The county is dedicated to preserving and protecting the health, safety, and welfare of all pedestrians, motor vehicle drivers, motor vehicle passengers and other individuals who utilize the public rights-of-way in the county. Pedestrians are increasingly using highways in ways for which the roads were not designed. These uses include approaching vehicles when in use or staying upon medians for purposes other than crossing the highway. These activities create safety hazards for pedestrians and distract drivers, making automobile crashes more likely. This section is designed to decrease the safety hazards by restricting such activity. These safety concerns are most acute at the intersections on the busiest roads within the county. This section applies to those "restricted intersections" identified in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, 
Intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two roads or highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roads or highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
Restricted intersection shall mean the first 200 feet of each highway or road of the following Intersections: 
• US Highway 27 intersection with Columbia Drive/Linda Lane 
• US Highway 27 intersection with Bowdon Junction Road 
• US Highway 27 intersection with Stripling Chapel Road 
• GA Highway 113 intersection with Linda Lane/Northside Drive 
• GA Highway 166 Bypass and GA Highway 166 (aka Maple Street) 
• GA Highway 61 (aka Carrollton Villa Rica Highway) and GA Highway 166 
• GA Highway 61 (aka Carrollton Villa Rica Highway) and Old Airport Road 
• GA Highway 61 (aka Carrollton Villa Rica Highway) and Old Highway 61 
• GA Highway 61 (aka Carrollton Villa Rica Highway) and Midway Church Drive 
• South Van Wert Road and NE Hickory Level Road 
Median shall mean a paved or unpaved area dividing a roadway or highway that separates lanes of traffic traveling in opposite directions, or in the case of left or right hand turn lanes, vehicles traveling in the same direction. 
(c)  Restricted activities. 
(1)  No pedestrian who is in a vehicle travel lane, median, sidewalk or other area adjoining a vehicle travel lane of a restricted intersection may approach any vehicle in operation. 
(2)  No pedestrian shall be within a restricted intersection and approach any vehicle in operation, except a vehicle that is legally parked at the curb or the shoulder. 
(3)  No person shall be upon a median of a restricted intersection unless that person is in the process of crossing the road in a safety zone or crosswalk or other legal manner. 
(d)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to (i) persons using the safety zone or crosswalk to cross the road, (ii) persons engaged in law enforcement or rescue activities, including providing assistance to an injured or disabled vehicle or person, (iii) persons entering a vehicle as an invited passenger where it is lawful to do so, (iv) persons engaged in repair or maintenance activities on the road or highway under the direction or authority of the county or the State of Georgia; or (v) roads or portions thereof that have been closed pursuant to permit or other express authorization from the county. 
(e)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the county sheriff, any law enforcement official (including without limitation Georgia State Patrol), the county code and ordinance enforcement officer, or their deputies or designees. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person violating this section may be required to forfeit not less than $25.00 nor more than $300.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 10-2-18(1)) 
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; utility easements in subdivisions, § 86-32. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide stormwater, sewerage, sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
Secs. 98-2—98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-31. - Removal or relocation of facilities. 
Whenever necessary for the construction, repair, improvement, maintenance, safe and effective operation, alteration or relocation of all or any portion of a road upon which a utility facility has been placed, as determined by the county, any or all of such facilities and appurtenances authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be immediately removed from the right-of-way, or reset or relocated thereon as required by the county, and at the sole expense of the permittee unless reimbursement is authorized by separate agreement. Should the permittee fail to remove or relocate its facilities upon reasonable notice from the county, the permittee shall be liable for any costs or damages incurred by the county as a result thereof. 
Sec. 98-32. - Indemnification of county. 
Any person granted a permit pursuant to this article shall indemnify and hold harmless the county and all officers, employees, or agents of the county against any and all claims, damages, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses of whatsoever nature, which may result from any injury to, or the death of, any persons or from the loss of, or damage to, property of any kind or nature, when such injury, death, loss or damages arises out of the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal or relocation of the facilities covered by the permit. 
Sec. 98-33. - Limit of county's obligations. 
The county, its engineers, officers, employees or contractors, shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to facilities covered by any permit granted pursuant to this article, or to any connection or connections thereto, by reason of road maintenance and construction activities or highway contract or operations. The permit holder shall be notified of a construction conflict and given a reasonable time to mark or relocate its facilities. 
Sec. 98-34. - Schedule. 
If the county undertakes to improve the road upon which a utility facility has been placed, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee pursuant to this article to plan with the county and its contractor a schedule which will clearly set forth at which stage of operations the permittee will be required to perform any adjustment to its facilities necessary to accommodate the road improvements. 
Sec. 98-35. - Safety features. 
During the initial installation or construction of facilities authorized by any permit granted pursuant to this article, or during any future repair, removal or relocation thereof, the permittee shall at all times maintain flagmen, signs, lights, flares, barricades and any other safety devices in accordance with the state department of transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as may be necessary to properly protect traffic upon the road and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage. Any ditching or trenching shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
Sec. 98-36. - Verification of limits of right-of-way. 
It shall be the permittee's sole responsibility to verify the limits of the public right-of-way for location of the utility facilities authorized by any permit granted pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 98-37. - Abutting landowners. 
No inherent or retained right or privilege of any abutting property owner is affected by any permit granted pursuant to this article, nor is the county to be held responsible for any claim which may develop between the permittee and any property owner concerning use of the right-of-way. The permittee is solely responsible for maintaining reasonable access to private driveways during installation of its facilities and for restoration of driveways after completion of the installation to the owner's satisfaction. 
Sec. 98-38. - Use of explosives. 
Use of explosives within the roadbed or beneath the pavement is prohibited unless approved by separate permit. 
Sec. 98-39. - Notice of beginning work. 
The permittee shall give the county a minimum of 24 hours' notice prior to beginning any work under any permit granted pursuant to this article. 
Secs. 98-40—98-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-51. - Required; application. 
Any person seeking permission to construct, operate and/or maintain any utility within the public right-of-way of any county road of the county shall apply for a permit to the department of roads and bridges, upon an application form provided by such department. 
Sec. 98-52. - Time limit. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be void unless work thereunder is begun within 12 months of the date of approval. 
Sec. 98-53. - Transferability. 
The provisions of any permit granted pursuant to this article are regulatory and not contractual. No interest or right of an applicant granted a permit may be transferred to another except by written consent of the county. 
Sec. 98-54. - Revocation. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this article may be revoked at the pleasure of the county upon 30 days' written notice to the permittee. 
Sec. 98-55. - Special provisions. 
The county may impose any special provisions upon the granting of a permit pursuant to this article that it deems in the best interest and welfare of the public. 
Sec. 98-56. - Limitations. 
(a)  No property right generated by permit. Any permit granted pursuant to this article is permissive only, and the placing of any facilities upon public property pursuant to any permit granted pursuant to this article shall not operate to create or vest any property right in the holder thereof. 
(b)  Design or construction details. Approval of any permit granted pursuant to this article does not constitute approval of design or construction details for the proposed facilities. The permittee is solely responsible for compliance with all applicable governmental codes and regulations. 
Secs. 98-57—98-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 98-71. - Purpose of article. 
The county board of commissioners adopts the cross connection control provisions as set forth in section 98-72 in order to avoid liabilities and possible contamination of the water supply of the county and any of its municipalities with private well supplies at cross connections. 
Sec. 98-72. - Policies. 
The following policies will be enacted: 
(1)  The interior use of combined well and county/city water for residential customers is not authorized under any conditions or circumstances. 
(2)  Water pipes from wells to the interior of residences are to be stubbed off at residential customers' expense, and then inspected by a county/city water department official to ensure compliance before county/city water is authorized for use. 
(3)  Wells may continue in use for any outside watering purposes around the homes of residential customers who elect to request county/city water service. 
(4)  Backflow preventors are not authorized for use by residential customers in conjunction with their wells under any conditions or circumstances. This will preclude possible contamination of the county/city water supply due to any future malfunction of the backflow preventor, and any future inspection requirements on the part of county/city employees. 
Chapter 102 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 58; roads and bridges, ch. 74; signs, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 86. 

Sec. 102-1. - Preamble and enactment. 
In pursuance of authority conferred by the 1983 Georgia Constitution and Georgia Zoning Procedures Act, as amended, and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, or general welfare of the county; lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the county; all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the commissioner of the county does hereby ordain that: 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 1.0) 
Sec. 102-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Regulations of Carroll County, Georgia, as amended" 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 2.0) 
Sec. 102-3. - Non-conforming uses. 
3.1.  Nonconforming uses and structures. 
1.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of a zoning ordinance is to have orderly use of property. Nonconforming uses that existed legally prior to June 1987 (hereinafter the "adoption") or change of a zoning ordinance create land uses that do not conform to the zoning ordinance. It is the purpose of this nonconforming use provision to allow legally existing nonconforming uses to be retained with certain limitations to protect adjacent property owners and the public from the inconsistencies created by nonconforming uses, but it is the intent that over time all nonconforming uses will be eliminated or brought to conform with this chapter. 
2.  Single family residential exemption. A single family residential dwelling unit that is being continuously used for residential use may be rebuilt, enlarged, and improved to the extent that such rebuilding, enlarging, and improvement does not violate an existing fire, safety, or health standard or ordinance shall be exempted from the requirements of this section. 
3.  Continuance of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land that was legal prior to the enactment of the adoption of the zoning ordinance shall be allowed to legally continue even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, subject to the following: 
(a)  The nonconforming use cannot be expanded to occupy a greater area of land or building area. 
(b)  The nonconforming use may continue only in the original building structure or land area that was originally occupied by the nonconforming use. 
(c)  The nonconforming use of the building, structure or land cannot be intensified or escalated, for example, by increasing the number of deliveries, employees or customers coming to the nonconforming use, or noise, dust, fumes or other pollutants emanating from the nonconforming use. 
(d)  A nonconforming use cannot be reinstated after it has been abandoned for a 12-month period of time. It shall be prima facia evidence of abandonment for the owner and/or operator of the nonconforming use to discontinue the nonconforming use for 12 months, to fail to obtain a new or renew an existing business license/occupational tax certificate, or like permit as required under the this Code for the operation of such nonconforming use, or to fail to declare and remit the sales tax required by state law for the nonconforming use. 
(e)  Failure to follow any other state, federal or local administrative procedure or regulation that is required for the nonconforming use shall be prima facia evidence of abandonment. 
(f)  A nonconforming use cannot be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(g)  A nonconforming use must maintain any screening or buffering that existed prior to the use becoming a nonconforming use or that was later voluntarily added. 
(h)  A use that constitutes a nuisance as defined by state law is not and cannot become a nonconforming use. 
4.  Continuance of nonconforming structure or building. A building or structure that is nonconforming or that contains a nonconforming use at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or at the time of enactment of an amendment to this chapter may be retained, except that it shall not be: 
(a)  Enlarged, altered or rebuilt, except for repairs necessary to maintain the structure or building in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Rebuilt, altered or repaired so as to expand the structure or building to occupy a greater area of land or building area. 
(c)  A building or structure may be rebuilt, altered or repaired if done in compliance with subsection (b). 
5.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a use that is dangerous to the general public to continue to exist. This section shall also not be construed to not require changes to buildings or structures to comply with any fire code, safety code, or other safety ordinance or regulation. 
6.  To protect the public from inconsistent zoning requirements and to make nonconforming uses as consistent with conforming uses as possible, nonconforming uses must comply to the extent feasible with zoning requirements such as parking, landscaping, setback, outside storage, screening or buffering requirements for the zoning district or use which may be enacted and do not substantially impact the nonconforming use or nonconforming structure. 
7.  Screening. Automobile wrecking and junk yards may continue when screened with a solid fence, wall, or natural screening having a height of at least six feet or that such height as will screen all junk or other materials or vehicles from the view of any adjacent property -owner or from any public road provided that such fence be at least ten feet from any street right-of-way or any zone district boundary. Screening shall shield or obscure one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation. A fence shall be considered a structural barrier that encloses, screens or demarcates or presents a solid face among or between its constituent members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. Affected property owners shall be required to conform to the screening requirements of this section by December 31, 2000. 
3.2.  Reserved. 
3.3.  Discontinuance of junk yards. All existing non-conforming junk yards shall be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter with regard to screening or be discontinued. 
3.4.  Restoration to a safe condition. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the codes enforcement officer of the county from requiring the restoration of any building to a safe or sanitary condition pursuant to any applicable federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 3.0; Res. of 9-25-00(1)) 
Sec. 102-4. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Resolution have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this Resolution, certain words or terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied." 
Abutting means having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. 
Accessory apartment means an accessory apartment is a second residential unit that is detached from the primary single-family residence on a lot or parcel. As an example, an accessory apartment may be a garage apartment or carriage house. An accessory apartment is usually required to be a complete housekeeping unit that can function independently with separate access, kitchen, bedroom, and sanitary facilities. 
Accessory building or accessory structure means a subordinate structure detached from, but located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure. 
Accessory use means: 
(1)  A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot and located on the same lot as such principal use; such as an off-street parking place, a garden or a tool shed. 
(2)  A use that: 
a)  Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal use or structure; 
b)  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal use or structure served; 
c)  Is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure served. 
Acre means for the purpose of this chapter the term "acre," in addition to its customary and ordinary meaning, shall include any lot, tract, or parcel of land or portion thereof which is 43,560 square feet in size. A half-acre shall include any lot, tract, or parcel of land or portion thereof which is 21,780 square feet in size. 
Alley means a public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration means the enlargement of a building or changes made in a building to convert it from one use to another, such as from a single family dwelling to a duplex or store. 
Buffer means a strip of land, identified on a site plan or by a zoning ordinance, established to protect one type of land use from another land use that is incompatible. Normally the buffer is landscaped or kept as natural, undisturbed open space. 
Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. A building is further defined as any structure with a roof intended for shelter or closure. 
Building height means the vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat, hip, gable and gambrel roofs and to the deck line of mansard roofs, measured from the street level if the building is not more than ten feet from the front lot line or from the grade in all other cases. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding steps, gutters and similar fixtures, and the centerline of the abutting street on which the building faces. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the county shall be the centerline of the street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs, or if no curbs measured from the inside ditch embankment off the street, or the middle of the traveled roadway of the street. On all streets that have multiple lanes of travel divided by a median, the centerline of the street shall be measured from the centerline of the lanes of travel going in one direction closest to the property or building in question. 
Church or place of religious worship means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include structures in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 
Club means buildings or facilities owned ;by or operated by a corporation, association, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose but not operated for profit, excluding churches and other religious places of worship. 
Conditional use means a use for a particular piece of property that may be allowed by the Governing Authority when specifically listed in and provided for by this ordinance. A conditional use is subject to such restrictive requirements as in the opinion of the Governing Authority would be necessary to insure that the use is not detrimental to surrounding property. 
Conference/convention center shall mean a facility used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, training, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including outdoor displays, food and beverage preparation and service for on-premises consumption. The accommodations can include sleeping, eating, and recreation. The site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate or arrange for all off-street parking associated with an individual event. 
Conventional home means a dwelling unit constructed from building materials such as lumber, brick, or stone delivered to the site, where the building is intended to be situated. For the purposes of this definition, conventional homes shall include industrialized dwellings and moved homes but exclude manufactured and mobile homes. 
DCA means the Georgia Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
Department means the county department of community development. The department of community development administers the zoning and development regulations. 
Development means the division of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land. 
District means a portion of the territory of the county, exclusive of streets, alleys, and other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises, and buildings are permitted and within which a uniform set of regulations applies. 
Dump means a waste disposal site that does not employ environmental protection measures such as covering and compaction. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used for residential occupancy. 
Dwelling unit means a dwelling or a portion thereof providing separate facilities for one or more persons living as a non-profit single housekeeping unit. 
Easement means the right of a person, government agency, or public utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, law, or marriage and living together. 
Family burial plot means a family burial plot means a private non-commercial cemetery dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for permanent interment of human remains. Such term shall not include governmentally owned cemeteries, commercial cemeteries, fraternal cemeteries, cemeteries owned and operated by churches, synagogues, or communities. 
Family child care home means a private residence where care, protection, and supervision are provided at least twice a week for a fee to no more than six children at one time, including children of the adult provider. 
Garage, repair means any structure, premises, or land used for the care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. 
Group child care center, class A means a building or structure where care, protection, and supervision are provided at least twice a week, on a regular schedule, to at least seven and no more than 12 children, including children of the adult provider. 
Group child care center, class B means a building or structure where care, protection, and supervision are provided at least twice a week, on a regular schedule, to more than 12 children, including children of the adult provider. 
Impervious surface means any material or combination of materials that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the earth. It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
Industrial park means a planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation, and open space. It has an enforceable master plan with covenants, conditions, and restrictions. 
Industrialized dwelling means any dwelling structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized homes are regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and does not include manufactured homes. 
Junkyard means the use of any space outside a building involved in the storage, keeping, abandonment, demolition, baling or disassembling of wrecked autos, trucks or other vehicles; storage or otherwise dealing in, but not excluding sale or exchange of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, used paper, cloths, plumbing fixtures and household appliances; provided that this definition shall not apply to any such uses conducted solely as an accessory use to the premises. Any site containing three or more automobiles not having current license plates or not being restored to operation shall be classified as a junkyard. 
Landfill means a disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day. 
Light industry means a use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
Living space means heated square footage area within a dwelling unit utilized for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing, and sanitation purposes. 
Lot means an unsubdivided parcel or portion of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a common use or occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use together with the customary accessory buildings and uses and open spaces belonging to the same; which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land, and having its principal frontage upon a county road, street, thoroughfare, state highway or a dedicated easement for ingress and egress on record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county; includes the terms "plot" and "parcel". 
Lot coverage means determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied or covered by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings, including covered porches and accessory buildings, by the gross area of that lot. 
Lot width means the shortest distance between the side line of a lot, measured along the building setback line. 
Manufactured home means a structure, used or intended to be used as a dwelling unit, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight feet or more in width, or 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, encloses 320 or more square feet of floor area; and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. "Manufactured home" includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401, et seq. For purposes of this definition, a "manufactured home" does not include a structure which otherwise complies with this subsection, but which was built prior to June 15, 1976, which units shall be classified as "mobile homes." 
Manufactured home park means any area, lot, parcel or tract held in common ownership, or for common operation, and on which individual portions of said area, lot, parcel or tract are leased for the placement of manufactured homes as a primary residence. A manufactured home park shall be synonymous with a mobile home park, trailer park, and other like living communities. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Moved home means a dwelling unit, building, or other permanent structure that is intended to be transported, moved, or relocated within or into the county over the roads or streets to a temporary or permanent location. For the purposes of this definition, a moved home is a conventional home. 
Non-conforming use means: 
(1)  A structure or lot lawfully occupied by a use that is not permitted in the zoning district in which it is situated. 
(2)  A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established. 
Outside storage means the keeping of, in an unroofed area, any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Principal use means the primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure as distinguished from an accessory or secondary use. 
Property owners association (also homeowners association) means a formally constituted non-profit association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of a fixed area that may take permanent responsibility for costs and upkeep of semi-private or common community facilities. 
Restaurant, drive-in means an establishment that delivers prepared food and/or beverages to customers in motor vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also serves prepared food and/or beverages to customers who are not in motor vehicles, for consumption either on or off the premises. 
Right-of-way means an area or strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or other special use. 
Secondary detached residential dwelling means a single family dwelling unit. 
Setback means the required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, or rear property line. 
Signs, outdoor means an attached or free-standing outdoor advertising structure for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge or idea to the public. Such a structure may be double-faced or V-type but shall contain not more than four signs in any one unit and not more than two signs side by side. 
Signs, principal use means an attached, free-standing or structural sign pertaining in its subject matter only to the advertising announcing or describing of the principal use or uses of the premises upon which displayed, or to products or services available on such premises. 
Special events facility shall mean any place kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public as a place which serves as a location for special events including, but not limited to, weddings and receptions, anniversary receptions, bar/bat mitzvah receptions, birthday/holiday parties, company events, such as retirement receptions and employee appreciation events, and other similar parties, receptions, or events. Such facility may specifically include privately-owned properties which have barns, lakes, open pastures or fields, where such special events may take place. Such facility shall be open only for scheduled, event-based operations. Such facility shall not include places of worship or restaurants. No such facility shall be closer than 50 feet from a property line. There shall be three categories of special events facilities as follows: 
(1)  "Small special events facility" shall mean a special event facility with a maximum event size of 150 guests and shall be located on a minimum parcel size of four acres or larger. 
(2)  "Intermediate special events facility" shall mean a special event facility with a maximum event size of 250 guests and shall be located on a minimum parcel size of 25 acres or larger. 
(3)  "Large special events facility" shall mean a special event facility with a maximum event size of 500 guests and shall be located on a minimum parcel size of 50 acres or larger. 
Street means a public way for vehicular traffic which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, major means a street designated as a "major street" by the use of symbols on the zoning districts maps of the county. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract of parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property, except that, where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of subdivision. 
Truck terminal means a structure or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or stored for routing or reshipment, or in which semi-trailers, including tractor and/or trailer units and other trucks, are parked or stored. 
Variance means a permit issued by the codes enforcement officer or community development appeals board which allows a applicant to vary from the minimum area requirements for a particular piece of property that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. A variance is subject to such restrictive requirements as in the opinion of the community development appeals board would be necessary to insure that the use is not detrimental to surrounding property. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and obstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory building are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front means a yard extending the full width or the lot and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the front line of the principal building. 
Yard, rear means a yard extending the full width of the lot at the rear line of the principal building from the rear line of the lot to the nearest point of the principal building. 
Yard, side means a yard situated between the principal building and side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
Zoning map means the official zoning district map, or maps excerpted therefrom, of the county. Said map(s) shall be identified by having the title "official zoning map(s)", the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners with the attest of the clerk of the board of commissioners, together with the seal of the county and the date of the resolution that the board of commissioner's recognizes the map. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 4.0; Res. of 10-13-98(2); Res. of 7-13-99(1)§ I; Ord. of 10-16-01(1), § 1; Ord. of 3-5-02(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-6-02(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-1-16(1); Ord. of 7-11-17(1), § 2) 
Sec. 102-5. - General provisions. 
5.1.  Use. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or parcel of land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except for a use permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.2.  Yard occupancy. Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to occupy any required yard, nor shall any side, rear or front yard be narrower or smaller than is required for the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.3.  Yard use limitation. Except as hereafter provided, no yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space for any other building. 
5.4.  Reduction in lot area. No lot may be reduced in area below the minimum lot area as specified herein for the zoning district within which said lot is located without having obtained a variance. 
5.5.  Frontage on corner lots and double frontage lots. The minimum required frontage for lots shall be governed by the subdivision regulations of the county, as amended. 
5.6.  Corner visibility. No structure, planting, or other visual obstruction above the height of four feet shall be permitted within 20 feet of an intersection of two street rights-of-way or the intersection of a street right-of-way and a railroad right-of-way. 
5.7.  Determination of unclassified and unlisted uses. In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use that is not specifically identified as a permissible use or conditional use in the underlying zoning district, or a use, which is not specifically identified as a permissible use or conditional use in another district, subject to the recommendation of the planning commission and subject to the approval of the county commission, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The county planner, zoning administrator, or his designee shall submit to the planning commission a written request for a determination of the district in which the unclassified use should be allowed as a permitted or conditional use. 
2.  The planning commission shall review the request as submitted and determine if the unclassified use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. The planning commission may seek an opinion of the county attorney in considering the request. 
3.  If the planning commission determines and finds that the unclassified use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses inherently permitted within the district requested, or if the planning commission determines and finds that the unclassified use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the conditional uses provided within the district, then the planning commission shall request the zoning administrator to prepare an advertisement for a text amendment to the zoning regulations regarding the unclassified use. 
(1)  After proper advertisement and hearing before the planning commission on the text amendment to the zoning regulations to allow the unclassified use as a permissible use or conditional use, the planning commission shall make a recommendation consistent with its finding to the board of commissioners for such unclassified use. 
(2)  If the board of commissioners, after proper advertisement and hearing on the text amendment to the zoning regulations to allow the unclassified use as a permissible use or conditional use, adopts the text amendment and amends the zoning regulations, the applicant shall receive a certificate of zoning compliance for permissible use or make application for a conditional use permit as provided in these rules and regulations. 
4.  In the event the planning commission determines that the unclassified use is not consistent with the character and intent of the permissible or conditional uses within current zoning district, but the unclassified use is consistent with the character and intent of the permissible uses or its conditional uses within another zoning district, then the planning commission may request the zoning administrator to prepare an advertisement for a text amendment to the zoning regulations regarding the unclassified use as a permissible use or conditional use in another district. In the alternative, the planning commission may require the applicant to first apply for a rezoning change into the appropriate zoning district. 
5.  In no event shall the provisions of this section be used to allow an incompatible use or a use specifically prohibited by these regulations within a certain zoning district. 
6.  Once a use has been allowed by the board of commissioners, it shall then be considered classified either under the permissible uses or under the conditional uses in the respective zoning district. 
5.8.  Lot frontage and width. Each lot containing a principal building shall have frontage on a publicly owned or maintained right-of-way as set forth within and required by the subdivision regulations of the county, as amended. In special cases, such as a lot on a cul-de-sac, provided the lot width at the minimum building line is maintained, lot frontage may be reduced to not less than 45 feet. All lot width requirements shall be measured at the minimum front building setback line. 
5.9.  Number of buildings on lot. Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot, except as authorized by the provisions of this chapter. 
5.10.  Interior tracts. Interior tracts shall be required to meet or exceed all requirements as set forth in the subdivision regulations of the county, as amended. An interior tract shall be connected to a public road by a permanent easement 
1.  Said easement shall connect the subject property with a public road and shall be: 
a.  No less than 30 feet in width; 
b.  Accurately described and filed in the public land records of the county in the name of the person applying for the building permit; and, 
c.  For the express purpose of ingress to, and egress from, the subject interior tract to the public road. 
2.  The grant of a zoning compliance certificate or building permit in accordance with this paragraph does not constitute a waiver by the county to deny a subsequent application when the circumstances show a violation of the subdivision regulations of the county, as amended. 
3.  The sharing of an easement, private access way, or driveway shall be shall be limited to two dwelling units. 
5.11.  Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of land use permits for the operation of customary home occupations or professions provides for an occupation for gain or support where the residence is secondary to the primary residential use and where the ordinary course of the occupation can completed from a residence or other structure without having any significant effect on the neighborhood or area from which such home occupation is carried on. 
(b)  Administrative review. It is the finding of the board of commissioners that the following occupations and professions represent customary home occupations that may be permitted in all residential and agricultural zoning districts where the same satisfies the additional specifications and requirements of this section. Under these circumstances, the application for a home occupation may receive administrative approval from the director of the department of codes enforcement, or his designee. 
Accommodation of not more than four boarders or roomers; 
Office of a professional person; 
Animal sales and supplies; 
Appraisal business; 
Art studio; 
Automotive decals; 
Baking; 
Beauty salon; 
Beauty shop; 
Business, financial and legal self help books and software; 
Canning; 
Care of not more than four children for compensation; 
Carpet cleaning service; 
Custom home construction; 
Dressmaking or sewing; 
Electric contractor; 
Garage office; 
General contracting; 
Hair salon; 
Hauling business; 
Herbal crafts and soaps; 
Home sales office; 
Home inspections; 
HVAC service calls; 
Income tax service; 
Internet mail order business; 
Janitorial service; 
Land surveying; 
Lawn maintenance; 
Lawn service; 
Mobile disc jockey; 
Paint contracting; 
Paintball field business; 
Photography business; 
Picture framing business; 
Residential trash collection; 
Sales; 
Teaching musical instrument(s), dance, crafts or academic subjects with instruction limited two pupils at one time; 
Tree service company; 
Video editing; and 
Vinyl siding business. 
(c)  Additional specifications. In all agricultural and residential districts, customary home occupations are permitted, however, the following additional specifications shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements for the district in which such uses are located: 
(1)  The applicant or operator must reside full-time at the residence where the home occupation or business is performed. 
(2)  Home occupation shall be limited in such a way as to not generate excess traffic at its location, and shall not have in excess of, in the aggregate, ten clients or customers at its location in any 24 hour period. 
(3)  The total floor space devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the heated dwelling space of the dwelling. 
(4)  No outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(5)  No on-street parking shall be permitted and sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for those residing in the home and for clients and customers of the permitted home occupation. 
(6)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. 
(7)  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. 
(8)  No machinery that causes noises or other interferences in radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
(9)  No chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used in a permitted home occupation. 
(10)  No external signs may be displayed advertising the product or service available. 
(11)  No person other than a resident of the dwelling may be employed in the home occupation. 
(d)  Prohibited Uses. A customary home occupation shall not include, but is not limited to, the following listed occupations: dancing or band instrument instruction in groups; tearooms and restaurants; tourist homes, boarding houses, or rooming houses; fish hatcheries, worm farms or bait houses; convalescent and nursing homes; kennels and animal hospitals; clinics and hospitals; and firewood sales. 
(e)  Applications for customary home occupations shall include an application fee set by the board of commissioners and only information reasonably necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this section, and as applicable, conformity with the standards herein. 
(f)  Approval or denial of the application shall be made within 30 days of the date of receipt of the application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application within five working days after such decision is made. Conditional approval shall require that the specific conditions and the reasons therefore be stated in writing and agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant upon agreement. In the event the director of the department of codes enforcement has not approved or denied any application submitted to it within 30 days of receipt of that application, then such application be deemed to have been approved. 
(g)  Appeals. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be specifically stated in writing by designating each specific provision or section which is not met and an explanation as to the reason or reasons why each such provision is not met. The applicant may appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. All appeals to the board of commissioners for land use permits for customary home occupations shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as hearings on applications for rezoning are conducted. 
(h)  The board of commissioners may grant land use permits for occupations or businesses compatible with the neighborhood from which such business or occupation is operated and where no nuisance as defined in state law or other significant adverse effect would result to the area or district zoned. 
(i)  The applicant shall submit such additional information, documents, or other materials as are deemed appropriate to the board of commissioners for which consideration in connection with any such appeal. The board of commissioners shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a land use permit: 
(1)  Whether, or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located; 
(2)  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the neighborhood; 
(3)  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under state law; 
(4)  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected; 
(5)  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected; 
(6)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations; 
(7)  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate; 
(8)  Whether or not special or unique conditions overcome the board of commissioners' general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow noncompatible business uses; 
(9)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation; 
(10)  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries; 
(11)  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition; and 
(12)  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
(j)  Renewal. A permit to operate a customary home occupation expires December 31 of each calendar year. Any permit granted under this section, after issuance, must be renewed annually not later than January 1 of each year; and an application for renewal shall be considered only in the event the current application is in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this section and all other appropriate ordinances of the county and the laws of this state. A renewal of the permit must meet all requirements of a new application, however, no advertisement or posting of a sign shall be required. Together with the written application described herein, applicant shall submit a non-refundable application fee equal to the cost of initiating an application hereunder. 
(k)  Minimum time between applications. An applicant who is denied shall not resubmit a proposal for home occupation, affecting the same property, more than once in a 12-month period. The 12-month period begins at the date of denial of the application or denial of the application before the board of commissioners, whichever is later. 
[(l)]  Appeal of decisions on home occupation use. Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision by the board of commissioners on home occupation use, special use permits, or variances may take an appeal to the superior court of the county by certiorari. The quasi-judicial appeal shall be limited to the proceedings and record before the board of commissioners. Any appeal must be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners within 30 days of the decision of the board of commissioners, and, upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. For the purpose of this section, the appeal time shall run from the day the particular vote or action is taken. 
5.12.  Substandard lots of record. Any lot of record existing at or before July 14, 1999, which has an area or a width that is less than is required by this chapter, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage are in one ownership at or before July 14, 1999, and such lots, individually, have an area or width that is less than required by this chapter, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the district in which they are located. 
(b)  Individual lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in subsection (a), in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record, existing at or before July 14, 1999, which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this chapter may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling. 
5.13.  Certificate of zoning compliance. To determine whether a structure or use existing or proposed for any property located within the county is or may be used or developed in compliance with this chapter, the owner of the property or his agent may request a certificate of zoning compliance from the planning and zoning administrator. If the proposed use is an unclassified and unlisted use, the applicant must first comply with the provisions of section 5.7 before proceeding under this section. 
(a)  Such request shall be in writing and on such forms as may be developed for such purpose, which shall minimally meet the following standards: 
(1)  Identification of the owner of the subject property; 
(2)  Identification of any agent of the owner of the subject property; 
(3)  A legal description of the subject property, or alternatively a description that provides an adequate description to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning administrator; 
(4)  A complete description and inventory of all existing structures on the subject property; whether any uses or structures are non-conforming; 
(5)  A complete description and inventory of all proposed structures proposed or to be located on the subject property under this chapter and for which the certificate of zoning compliance is being requested; 
(6)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities presently occurring; and 
(7)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities proposed to occur on the subject property and for which the certificate of zoning compliance is being requested. 
(8)  Certification of the agent or property owner that all the information is true and correct, acknowledgment that such information is relied upon by the county, and the certificate may be void if any material information is untrue. 
(b)  The planning and zoning administrator or his representative shall respond in writing within three business days of receipt of a request for a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(c)  The issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance shall be confirmation that the structures and/or uses located on or proposed for the subject property have been determined to be in compliance with the zoning ordinance of this county and may be legally conducted thereon as of the date of issuance of the certificate. 
(d)  In absence of a certificate of zoning compliance, no representation by any official or employee of the county shall in any way legally bind the county or in any way constitute any determination that the structures and/or uses located on or proposed for the subject property are in compliance with the zoning ordinance of the county, or any appendix thereto nor shall any owner of property within the county or his agent, successor or assign, claim any vested right to maintain or construct any structure and/or conduct any use located on or proposed for the subject property. 
(e)  Any certificate of zoning compliance issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of 90 days unless the underlying zoning is changed by official action by the governing authority, within which period the applicant must make further application to commence or conduct the uses requested within the application for a certificate of zoning compliance or construct any structure(s) identified in the application for a certificate of zoning compliance. 
5.14.  Temporary manufactured home occupancy and land use permit (TLUP). 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of a temporary manufactured home occupancy and land use permit is to establish a use for the temporary location of a manufactured home or a temporary land use land permit (TLUP) in certain zoning districts for the installation, use, and occupancy of manufactured homes for a set duration. 
(b)  Administrative review. It is the finding of the board of commissioners that the requirements set forth herein represent appropriate circumstances where a TLUP may be permitted conditioned upon the satisfaction of the specifications and requirements of section 5.14(c)—(k). Under these circumstances, the application for a TLUP may receive administrative approval from the director of the department of community development, or his designee. 
(c)  Application. Applications for a TLUP shall include an appropriate number of copies of a completed application to be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development. The application 
(1)  The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. In addition, persons having a security interest in the subject property must consent to the application. 
(2)  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of community development. 
(3)  Any other information reasonably necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this section, and as applicable, conformity with the standards herein. 
(4)  A separate statement of the applicant that recognizes the temporary nature of the TLUP and that certification that the applicant and landowner shall cause the removal of the manufactured home on the termination of the TLUP. 
(d)  All applications will be subject to review for completeness by the department of community development, with the application first being submitted to the zoning administrator for a staff review. During the review process, adjoining landowners will be notified of the application and given the opportunity for comment within ten working days. The zoning administrator will then offer his assessment to the director of community development, who will make a written decision. 
(e)  If the requirements of this section are satisfied, the director of community development shall issue a TLUP for 12 months, and if appropriate renew the TLUP. If the requirements of this chapter are not met, the director shall deny the application for the TLUP. 
(f)  General conditions. The following general conditions shall apply after a TLUP is issued. 
(1)  All construction, installation, and design requirements for manufactured homes shall be satisfied; 
(2)  The manufactured home used under the TLUP shall be provided access by the same driveway as the principal dwelling and shall not result in the construction or creation of an additional driveway or curb cut; 
(3)  No manufactured home shall be used for purposes of storage or as storage units. 
(4)  The transfer of ownership of the manufactured home shall cause immediate revocation of the TLUP. 
(5)  Any violation of this section, its paragraphs, provisions, standards, or conditions herein or placed upon the TLUP shall terminate the TLUP. In the event of the director terminates the TLUP, the procedures set forth in paragraph 5.14(I) shall govern medical hardship applications. 
(g)  Application for a medical hardship TLUP. A TLUP may be issued to install a manufactured home for temporary residential use for a medical hardship. 
(1)  An application for a medical hardship TLUP shall include the following: 
(A)  A letter or certified statement by a licensed medical doctor or by other appropriate medical evidence that the applicant is in medical need of personal care and his/her belief that a hardship condition exists requiring the use of a manufactured home for the health care of the immediate family member. 
(B)  Satisfactory evidence that the principal dwelling on the premises does not contain sufficient facilities to accommodate the proposed occupant of the manufactured home. 
(C)  For purposes of this section, the term "medical hardship" is defined as a person whose health or mental condition necessitates attention and supervision from the immediate family located in the principal dwelling on which premises is proposed for the TLUP. 
(D)  The manufactured home used under the TLUP shall be located in the rear yard of the principal dwelling and within 50 feet of the principal dwelling. 
(E)  The county environmental health department shall approve the joint use of the onsite wastewater system with the principal structure. 
(2)  Renewal of a medical hardship TLUP. An applicant may renew the TLUP for a period of 12 months by submitting an application to continue the TLUP for a medical hardship. To reapply, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(A)  A completed application to be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development. 
(B)  A nonrefundable application fee and costs of certified mailings to adjacent landowners. 
(C)  Other information reasonably necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(D)  A separate statement of the applicant that recognizes the temporary nature of the TLUP and that certification that the applicant and landowner shall cause the removal of the manufactured home or the removal of all personalty on the termination of the TLUP. 
(3)  When circumstances supporting the medical hardship end, the applicant will be notified by a certified letter that the temporary manufactured home permit has expired, and from the date that the letter was received, the applicant will have 30 days to remove the manufactured home from the premises. If the applicant fails to take action within the 30-day period, a citation may be issued for each day that the violation continues. Otherwise, the director may seek removal of the manufactured home by the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.14(I). 
(h)  Application for a home construction TLUP. A TLUP may be issued to install a manufactured home for a temporary residential use in an agricultural or Residential-1 (R-1) districts where an application for a building permit has been obtained for the construction of a conventional home. 
(1)  The TLUP for home construction shall expire at the end of 12 months or after the certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever event occurs earlier. The TLUP permit may be renewed at the end of the 12-month period where the building permit is active and has not been revoked. 
(2)  The applicant will be notified by certified letter that the permit has expired, and will have 30 days from the date the letter was received to either renew the permit or remove the manufactured home from the premises. If the applicant fails to take action within the 30-day period, a citation may be issued for each day that the violation continues. Otherwise, the director may seek removal of the manufactured home by the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.14(I). 
(i)  Application for a new home sales TLUP. A TLUP may be issued to install an industrialized dwelling as a temporary office in all residential classifications for a real estate sales office to sell lots or new homes. The TLUP may only granted for placement within the boundaries of the development where lots are to be sold and new homes are to be built. The TLUP shall not be issued until the preliminary plat of the development has be approved. The specific location of the industrialized dwelling shall be subject to the approval. 
(1)  A TLUP for new home sales shall expire at the end of 12 months or after the final sale of the final home in the final phase. These permits may be renewed at the end of the 12-month period, provided that the applicant has remaining lots or homes to sale. 
(2)  The applicant will be notified by certified letter that the permit has expired, and will have 30 days from the date the letter was received to either renew the permit or remove the manufactured home from the premises. If the applicant fails to take action within the 30-day period, a citation may be issued for each day that the violation continues. Otherwise, the director may seek removal of the manufactured home by the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.14(I). 
(j)  Application for a temporary office TLUP. A TLUP may be issued to install an industrialized dwelling as a temporary office in any commercial or industrial district where a building permit has been received to construct a permanent office building. 
(1)  A TLUP for a temporary office shall expire at the end of 12 months or after the certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever event occurs earlier. The TLUP permit may be renewed at the end of the 12-month period where the building permit is active and has not been revoked. 
(2)  The applicant will be notified by certified letter that the permit has expired, and will have 30 days from the date the letter was received to either renew the permit or remove the manufactured home from the premises. If the applicant fails to take action within the 30-day period, a citation may be issued for each day that the violation continues. Otherwise, the director may seek removal of the manufactured home by the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.14(I). 
(k)  Application for a security purpose TLUP. A TLUP for a manufactured home may be issued as a residence in a commercial district and in an industrial district for security purposes, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The occupant of the manufactured home shall be an employee of the commercial or industrial enterprise, hired for the purpose of security. No more than one manufactured home shall be allowed on the tract owned by the commercial or industrial enterprise for which the application is made. 
(2)  Before any permit shall be issued the landowner/applicant or business owner/applicant must show and state in a signed affidavit that the dwelling on the premises shall be used for security purposes to accommodate a full-time employee/occupant. 
(3)  A manufactured home permit that is issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the issue date. A renewal of the TLUP under this subsection must meet all requirements of a new application. 
(4)  The applicant will be notified by certified letter that the permit has expired, and will have 30 days from the date the letter was received to either renew the permit or remove the manufactured home from the premises. If the applicant fails to take action within the 30-day period, a citation may be issued for each day that the violation continues. Otherwise, the director may seek removal of the manufactured home by the procedure set forth in paragraph 5.14(I). 
(l)  If the applicant or landowner fails to remove the manufactured home within 30 days of the expiration of the TLUP, the director of the department of community development is authorized to seek immediate compliance of this chapter by legal process by instituting an injunction or other appropriate action to remove the manufactured home or personalty from the premises at the expense of the applicant. In such event the director shall be authorized to seek the costs of removal and any additional monetary relief the court may award. 
(m)  Any person violating the terms of this section, either without obtaining a TLUP or for causing a manufactured home to be installed, occupied, and used for a time period in excess of that TLUP issued under subsection 5.14(c) shall be deemed to have violated this section and be subject to all remedies provided under the ordinances of the county. 
(n)  Appeal of decisions. Any person, persons or entities whose application for a TLUP is denied by a decision by the director of community development may appeal the decision within 30 days of their denial to the board of commissioners. Failure to file an appeal within 30 days of the decision of the director of community development shall result in a final decision. With the transmission of the appeal, the director shall include the written reasons for the denial and any other pertinent circumstances that may be relevant to the appeal. 
(1)  The appeal shall be posted and advertised as an appeal from an application for a TLUP prior to being placed on the agenda for a hearing. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall review the decision of the director under the standards set forth in section 102-13. Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision by the board of commissioners on a TLUP may take an appeal to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari. 
5.15.  Family burial plot. 
(a)  Purpose and findings. It is the finding of the board of commissioners that every competent adult has the right to control certain decisions relating to his or her own funeral arrangements. The intent of this section is to set forth minimum specifications and requirements for a family burial use. Requirements are imposed only to the extent necessary to protect the public health and from any significant effect on the neighborhood or area from which the family burial use is established. It is the further finding of the board of commissioners that a family burial plot, which satisfies the minimum specifications and requirements, shall be a principal use in the agricultural zoning district. 
(b)  Minimum specifications and requirements for family burial plot. 
(1)  Application. A complete application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the department of community development with required documentation as set forth in this section. 
i.  Landowner consent. The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. 
ii.  Fee. The non-refundable application fee to be based upon cost incurred to cause a survey to be taken of the family burial plot and same recorded in official records of the county. 
iii.  Certificate of zoning compliance. At any time a person applies for a family burial plot use in the unincorporated county, the applicant shall first obtain a certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee certifying that the proposed site of the family burial use lies within the agricultural zoning district. 
(2)  Area requirements. A family burial plot shall comply with the following area requirements: 
i.  Minimum size of tract or parcel. The minimum size of the tract or parcel of contiguous land being considered for a family burial plot shall be ten acres. 
ii.  Maximum size of family burial plot. The maximum size of the family burial plot shall be 1,600 square feet and have 40 feet of width and 40 feet of length. 
iii.  Setback requirements. 
(A)  The minimum setback line from any property line shall be 50 feet. 
(B)  The minimum setback line from any building or structure, regardless of property line, shall be 100 feet. 
(C)  The minimum setback line from any water source or surface water shall be 100 feet. 
(3)  Survey. Each landowner is encouraged to provide a survey, by a registered surveyor, containing a registration point and the boundaries of the family burial plot. 
(4)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
i.  Vault requirement. All being interred in a family burial plot shall have an outer burial container or vault. 
ii.  Perpetual access. The landowner shall provide perpetual access to the county and immediate family and descendants of those persons interred in the burial plot. 
iii.  Duty to preserve and protect. The landowner, and all subsequent landowners, shall preserve and protect the cemetery or burial ground and keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may also include the cleaning, maintenance, and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection. 
(5)  Prohibited location. The family burial plot shall not be located within a floodplain. 
(6)  Prohibited uses. Solicitation or sale of any burial space or grave within the family burial plot shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Funeral directors. If the burial is supervised by any person licensed in the state to practice funeral directing (funeral director), the funeral director may use the following procedure in lieu of meeting the requirements set forth in subsection 5.15(b)(1). 
i.  Provide a completed application to the zoning administrator on the forms provided by the department of community development having the following information: 
(A)  The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s). 
(B)  A name, address, and telephone number of a contact person. 
(C)  The size of the tract or parcel of land. 
(D)  A sketch of the property showing the location of the family burial plot, buildings, property lines, any water source, and a North arrow. 
ii.  The application shall be filed with the department within 48 hours of the internment by the applicant or funeral director. 
(8)  Removal from tax digest. Upon completion of the above stated requirements, the landowner may present the survey, map, and certification of zoning compliance to the office of the tax assessor to have the family burial plot moved to an exempt status in the tax digest. 
5.16.  Standards governing the construction, installation, or relocation of conventional and manufactured homes. 
5.16.1. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to promote land use compatibility, protect property values and ensure an adequate minimum living space standard. The construction, placement, installation, and relocation of conventional and manufactured homes after August 6, 2002 shall be subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein. The requirements and procedures of this section shall be in addition to the rules and regulations of each underlying zoning district, including but not limited to, minimum lots, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and required foundations. It is not the intent of this section to address, interfere, or intrude upon the safety and construction standards for manufactured homes that are reserved exclusively for federal regulation. 
5.16.2. Standards relating to manufactured and conventional homes. 
a.  Each home (either conventional or manufactured) being constructed, installed, located, or relocated within the county shall comply with the following design standards: 
1.  The pitch of the roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of three feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run within tolerances and the roof shall be finished with composition, fiberglass, slate, concrete, asphalt, or wood shingles, or non-reflective, crimped metal sheets. 
2.  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) and be comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional homes. 
3.  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus from each manufactured home shall be removed after placement or relocation on a lot or parcel and before occupancy. 
4.  Landings and steps leading away from all exterior doors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with state law and the county ordinances, said state law provisions being expressly incorporated by reference as part of this requirement. 
5.  A foundation or curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, and constructed of masonry or acceptable alternative materials shall be constructed and installed in compliance with county ordinances in the following residential zoning districts: Agricultural (A), Residential-1 (R-1), Residential-2 (R-2), Residential-3 (R-3), Residential-30 (R-30), Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS), and Multifamily Residential (MFR). The foundation or curtain wall shall enclose the area located under the conventional or manufactured home to the ground level. Masonry or acceptable alternative materials, which shall be approved by the department director, shall have a minimum thickness of four inches. A foundation or curtain wall of vinyl or non-reflective metal skirting shall be acceptable in lieu of masonry materials for dwelling units located within mobile home parks and the following residential zoning district: High Density Detached Residential (HDDR). 
6.  Each conventional home shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI), and other ordinances adopted by the county, and hereinafter adopted. 
b.  Each conventional and manufactured home being moved, constructed installed, located, or relocated within the county after August 6, 2002 shall not be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county if such conventional and manufactured home is more than seven years old. The age of the conventional and manufactured home shall be measured from the day the application for building permit is submitted to the department for approval. 
c.  Each conventional and manufactured home being installed, located, or relocated within the county shall contain no less than 1,230 square feet of living space. 
5.16.3. Permit requirements for construction, installation, and relocation within county. 
a.  Each conventional and manufactured home that is proposed to be installed or relocated within the unincorporated limits of the county may not be installed or relocated without first obtaining a building permit to install, locate, or relocate a manufactured home. 
b.  Any person who desires to install or relocate a conventional or manufactured home within the county shall first apply to the department for a building permit. A building permit to construct, install, or relocate a conventional or manufactured home within the county shall not be considered a permit to occupy a dwelling. All applicable permitting requirements of the development package shall be met prior to issuance of any permits, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Certificate of zoning compliance. 
2.  Proof of no outstanding property taxes on subject property. 
3.  The county environmental health septic approval. 
c.  Occupancy prohibited without valid permit. No person shall occupy any conventional or manufactured home or other dwelling unit as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy the same as a residence unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been obtained as provided by this section. 
d.  Prohibition for use as storage. Conventional, manufactured and mobile homes shall not be used for storage purposes or as storage buildings. 
e.  Responsibilities of park owners and operators. No owner or operator of a manufactured home park shall permit any manufactured home to be installed or relocated within the confines of such park unless a building permit has been obtained for the specific manufactured home being installed or relocated. No owner or operator of any manufactured home park shall permit any manufactured home within the confines of such park unless a building permit has been obtained. 
f.  Permitted use locations. 
1.  A manufactured home that meets the standards for installation and relocation and the underlying rules and regulations of the respective zoning district, shall be allowed as a permitted use as a primary family residence in the following districts (A, MHS and HDDR). 
2.  A conventional home that meets the standards for construction, installation, and relocation and the underlying rules and regulations of the respective zoning district, shall be allowed as a permitted use as a primary family residence in the following districts (A, R-1, R-2, R-30, R-3, MFR, HDDR). 
g.  Conditional use locations. A manufactured home that meets the standards for installation and relocation and the underlying rules and regulations of the respective zoning district may be permitted as a conditional use as a primary family residence in the following districts: (R-1, R-2, R-30, R-3, and MFR) subject to the requirements of section 102-13. 
5.16.4. Compatibility review process. 
a.  Any applicant who does not meet the standards set forth in article III and contends that the proposed construction, installation, or relocation of the conventional home or manufactured home is similar and comparable in exterior appearance, building materials, and living area to other dwelling units that have been constructed on adjacent tracts, lots, and parcels may submit an application to the compatibility standards review committee (hereinafter referred to as "committee"), for a permit to construct, install or relocate said conventional or manufactured home. 
b.  The procedures for approval are as follows: 
1.  Applications for approval of placement of conventional or manufactured homes shall be submitted with a nonrefundable application fee on a form or forms developed for that purpose to the committee for review at the department. Conventional or manufactured homes that have been illegally placed upon a tract, lot, or parcel shall be first removed before an application for approval of placement shall be accepted. 
2.  The application shall include only information reasonably necessary to make determination as to conformity with the provisions of this section. The application shall include information to determine conformity with the standards herein, a copy of the covenants and any architectural standards, other information reasonably necessary to make determinations required by this section. In addition, the application shall include recent photographs of the front, side, and rear of the conventional or manufactured home exterior finish (whichever is applicable), four pictures taken from the proposed site of the dwelling unit in the northerly, easterly, southerly, and westerly directions, and pictures of any neighbor's adjacent dwelling units. The photographs shall be taken within the 30 days prior to the submittal of the application. In addition, each application shall be accompanied by a site plan or sketch plan containing appropriate information including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Location of all existing buildings, structures, easements, and boundary lines. 
(b)  North point, scale, land district, and land lot. 
(c)  Existing use of adjacent property. 
(d)  Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and land uses. 
3.  Applications shall first be reviewed for completeness. If the application is rejected for not being complete, the applicant shall be notified of the reasons for rejection within 15 working days of receipt of the application. The applicant shall be responsible for the satisfaction of all of the comments prior to the resubmission of the revised application. If the revised application is not received within 30 days of notification of incompleteness, it shall be dismissed without prejudice and the applicant must resubmit a new application affecting the same property thereafter. 
4.  The committee shall review the application for compatibility with the following criteria: 
(a)  Architectural appearance and similarity within the development or surrounding developments, in size, siding material, roof pitch, roof material, foundation, square footage, and general aesthetic appearance; 
(b)  Existing development in the same zoning district or general area, in architectural appearance and similarity within the development or surrounding developments, in size, siding material, roof pitch, roof material, foundation, square footage, and general aesthetic appearance; and 
(c)  Proposed development permitted in the same zoning district or general area. 
5.  Approval or denial of a complete application shall be made within 20 working days of the date of receipt of the completed application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application within two working days after such decision is made. Conditional approval shall require that the specific conditions and the reasons therefore be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant upon agreement. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be specifically stated in writing by designating each specific provision of this section or other applicable county ordinance that is not met and an explanation as to the reason or reasons why each such provision is not met. 
c.  Appeal from compatibility review committee. 
1.  The applicant may appeal the decision of the compatibility standards review committee to the community development appeals board who will act on said appeal. The applicant may submit such additional information, documents or other materials as are deemed appropriate to the community development appeals board for its consideration in connection with any such appeal. The decision of the community development appeals board shall be in writing and shall specifically set forth findings of fact and identify specific provisions contained in this section upon which it relies, if the applicant's appeal is denied. 
2.  In the event that the compatibility standards review committee has not approved or denied any completed application submitted to it within 20 days of receipt of that completed application, then such application shall be deemed to have been approved. 
d.  Compatibility standards review committee. For the purpose of reviewing the standards affecting conventional homes or manufactured homes or mobile homes, as contemplated in this chapter, a compatibility standards review committee consisting of the county zoning administrator, the county building official and the county tax assessor is hereby established. A quorum shall consist of any of the three members, or their designees, and the decision of any two of the three members shall be binding on the committee and this county. The committee shall adhere to the provisions of this chapter. In the event that one or more members of the committee is/are unable to participate in the review process contemplated in this section, then such named member of or members may designate his or her associate or assistant as an alternate to act in the place of the named member until such member is able to again participate in the committee review process. 
e.  Minimum time between applications. A property owner shall not resubmit an application for construction, placement, installation, or relocation of a conventional home or manufactured home affecting the same property, more than once in a 12-month period. The 12-month period shall begin at the date of denial of the application before the compatibility standards review committee or community development appeals board, whichever is the later date. 
5.16.[5]. Conventional or manufactured home construction, installation, placement, or relocation before building permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, including installation or relocation of a manufactured home or conventional home before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
5.17.  Greenspace required. 
A.  Findings. 
(1)  Greenspace provides a recognizable and substantial benefit to the residents of new developments and contributes to the overall quality of life in the unincorporated county. Greenspace encourages conservation of land and the preservation of greenspace, wildlife habitat, environmental resources, and the enjoyment of private community facilities. 
(2)  The board of commissioners determines that the creation and establishment of permanent greenspace discourages the premature and unnecessary conversion of greenspace lands to urban uses and protects against the resultant adverse impacts, such as air, noise and water pollution, traffic congestion, destruction of scenic beauty, disturbance of the ecology and environment, hazards related to geology, fire and flood, and other demonstrated consequences of urban sprawl. Furthermore, greenspace and greenways add value to neighboring houses and adjacent properties. 
B.  Purpose. 
(1)  To provide a requirement for private greenspace amenities to developments, and alternatively a payment in-lieu for smaller size set-asides. 
(2)  To preserve approximately 20 percent of the occupied site acreage as meaningful greenspace. The occupied site acreage means all land within the development less the land necessary for laying out streets. Developments having densities greater than two dwelling units per acre shall be required to provide additional greenspace. 
C.  Definitions. 
(1)  A larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(2)  Buffer means as an open space, landscaped area, fence, wall, berm, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, other uses or nuisances. 
(3)  Development means a subdivision plan, rezoning application, conditional use application, building permit, or land use permit. 
(4)  Greenspace shall include the following: 
(a)  Permanently protected land, including agricultural and forestry land whose development rights have been severed from the property, that is in its undeveloped, natural state; 
(b)  Outdoor improved recreation, including but not limited to any amenity package, which may include but not be limited to a swimming pool, tot lot, playground, clubhouse, tennis, handball, volleyball, basketball, sidewalks, bike and pedestrian paths and benches, areas which include fields for competitive sports, golf courses, amphitheaters, and capital improvements needed to support such facilities; 
(c)  Outdoor unimproved recreation, including but not limited to areas of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value, areas particularly suited for park and recreation purposes, including boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, skating, birding, riding horses, observing or photographing nature, picnicking, playing non-organized sports and access to lakeshores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major recreation and greenway corridors; 
(d)  A greenway corridor that connects separate parcels of wildlife habitat, between which some species could not travel unless the greenway remains intact; 
(e)  A private park that features scenic views; 
(f)  Water bodies, land located within the 100-year floodplain, and utility easements may be used to partially fulfill greenspace requirements, however any overall credit received from such water and floodplain type lands and utility easements shall be reduced by 50 percent; by way of example, and not being limited to the foregoing, one acre of floodplain shall be credited as 0.50 acres of greenspace; furthermore, such water, floodplain type lands, and utility easements shall not exceed 50 percent of the required greenspace for the development unless the proposed greenspace provides exceptional recreational and/or environmental benefit by virtue of its location, connectivity to other greenspace or other exceptional qualities; and 
(g)  Parking areas, road right-of-ways, impervious surfaces, retention ponds and yards with dwellings may not be included in determining greenspace, unless the greenspace contains features that demonstrate an exceptional recreational and/or environmental benefit by virtue of its location, connectivity to other greenspace or other exceptional qualities. 
D.  Application and exemptions. 
(1)  Application. Development that is equal to or greater than five acres shall comply with this section. However, development that consists of less than five acres shall comply with this section where the development is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
(2)  Exemptions. Development in an agricultural zoning district having a lot or parcel size equal to or greater than five acres and development within a PUD zoning district shall not be required to comply with this section. 
(3)  Payment in-lieu. Where the total greenspace of a development contains equal to or less than three acres, the applicant may seek to provide, and the county may accept, a payment in-lieu of providing private greenspace. 
E.  Greenspace requirements. 
(1)  Unless modified by the board of commissioners fora specified public purpose at the time of zoning, the set-aside of greenspace acreage shall be required according to Table 1, entitled Required Greenspace. 
(2)  Example: 45 houses on 100 acres. 
(a)  Step 1: Compute density ratio (houses/acre) for Column 1. 
45 houses ÷ 100 acres = 0.45 houses/acre 

 
;adv=6;(b)  Step 2: Find required Greenspace in Column 2. 

 
∝ Required Greenspace (Acres)/Dwelling Unit = 0.55 

 
F.  Ownership and maintenance. 
(1)  Ownership. Greenspace shall be owned by all land owners of the development as tenants in common. 
(2)  Greenspace covenant. A greenspace covenant setting forth the requirements of section 5.17 shall be placed upon the development at or before the filing of the final plat. The greenspace covenant shall provide for the permanent protection of the greenspace. The greenspace covenant shall not be less than 20 years. 
(3)  Maintenance. The county subdivision ordinance shall regulate the design, construction, and maintenance of the greenspace, and the applicant shall demonstrate that all greenspace shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the county subdivision ordinance. 
G.  Form of greenspace. 
(1)  Greenspace shall form sizable contiguous blocks of land that are accessible to residents of the development and, where possible, shall be designated as one separate parcel of land. 
(2)  Buffers. Buffers protect the county's rural character and in shielding a development from incompatible adjacent uses. 
(a)  Lands in the form of thin buffers (e.g., thin ribbons), around the development are strongly discouraged. Buffers serve a different (but important) function than greenspace. 
(b)  Any strip of land that measures 20 feet or less shall constitute a buffer. 
(c)  Applicants may count ten percent of a buffer area toward the development's overall greenspace amount, provided that the buffer is placed in a separate parcel. 
H.  Cash payment in-lieu of land set-aside. 
(1)  If the total greenspace falls below three acres, the county may allow the payment of a fee in-lieu of set-aside of land based on the appraised value of the land being platted and the amount of land required to be set-aside, if, in the judgment of the county, the quantity of land to be subdivided is of a size or configuration that set-aside of greenspace: 
(a)  Is not feasible or practical; or 
(b)  Will not create a parcel suitable for greenspace purposes listed herein, as defined in section 5.17C.(4). 
(2)  The fee shall be paid at the time of final platting. 
(3)  Appraisal requirements. The developer shall furnish an appraisal of land value for the purpose of determining the cash payment due in-lieu of land set-aside. The appraisal shall determine fair market value based upon an appraisal methodology consistent with the uniform standards of professional appraisals or other real estate valuation techniques approved and used the state when expending state funds for land acquisition. The appraisal shall be prepared by a certified appraiser and shall indicate the fair market value of the land within the proposed subdivision as rezoned and platted by the county. The director of community development may consider and, if appropriate, accept an another method of appraisal for applications involving one lot. 
(4)  The county authorizes the director of community development, or his designee, to determine the fee to be paid to the county as a payment in-lieu based upon the standards set forth herein. 
(5)  All fees in-lieu of set-aside payments shall be deposited in a separate fund established by the board of commissioners, and such funds and the interest thereon shall be used only for the purchase and development of public greenspace. 
I.  Resubdividing greenspace; certain resubdivisions prohibited. All lands subdivided after adoption of this section shall comply with the requirements set forth herein. Where any development, which has previously complied with this section by setting-aside or providing a cash payment in-lieu of land set-aside, recombines or combines lawfully platted lots so as to create a smaller number of resultant lots by resubdivision, the subdivider shall not receive a credit for greenspace previously set-aside or a refund for cash payment made in-lieu of land set-aside. In no instance will lands set-aside, or cash payments made in-lieu of land set-aside, be returned to the applicant as a result of resubdivsion. 
J.  Previously approved greenspace. 
(1)  Where a development, which has previously received zoning approval from the board of commissioners, was approved with a zoning condition or stipulation that requires the applicant, owner, or subdivider to set aside a certain percentage or acreage for greenspace, and the zoning condition or stipulation is contained in (i.e., spread upon), the official minutes of the board of commissioners, the applicant, owner, or subdivider shall be required to set aside said greenspace that may be identified in a development plan. 
(2)  If the percentage or acreage for greenspace is more than that percentage required by this section, the greater percentage (i.e., that approved by the board of commissioners), shall apply. 
(3)  If the percentage or acreage for greenspace is less restrictive or no requirement was provided, the requirements set forth in section 5.17E., the requirements as set forth in section 5.17E. shall apply. 
K.  Modifications and exceptions. The chairman and board of commissioners may modify or make exceptions from the standards and requirements set forth in section 5.17. 
5.18.  Unimproved roads—Study required. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a supplemental report requirement where an applicant proposes a rezoning application, conditional use application, or other application that increases the traffic volume upon adjacent unimproved public roads. Rural development is often served by unimproved public road, which are defined as dirt, gravel roads, and unpaved county roads. The density at which land is zoned has an enormous influence on the amount of traffic generated from that land and its subsequent impact on the capacity of the abutting roads. While unimproved roads preserve rural character, a rezoning that increases traffic volumes on adjacent unimproved roads may overload the capacity of unimproved roads and degrade the road beyond the threshold that the road can accommodate. 
2.  Finding. Where an applicant proposes a rezoning application, conditional use application, or other application that increases the traffic volume upon adjacent unimproved roads, the board of commissioners finds it necessary to require that the applicant study the proposed impact to the adjacent unimproved roads and submit a report providing detailed findings before the applicant may proceed to a planning commission hearing on the application. 
3.  Required study. The study shall include the following information. 
A.  Rating the unimproved road. The applicant shall gather basic data, which include traffic volume information, for the affected unimproved road(s). The basic information shall include the physical conditions of the roadway, traffic counts, surface type, road width, drainage features, width of clear zone, road alignment rating (i.e., comfortable travel speed), and any other appropriate criteria. 
B.  Gravel road capacity analysis. The applicant shall determine the capacity of each unimproved road affected by the proposed application. 
C.  Calculating unused capacity. The applicant shall compare the existing traffic volumes to the capacity threshold. By subtracting out existing traffic volumes from the maximum acceptable volume level for each gravel road segment, the "unused" capacity can be calculated and allocated to the buildable, undeveloped abutting land. 
D.  Land access analysis. Using the ITE trip generation manual standard of ten trips per day per single-family residential dwelling unit, the number of dwelling units that could be built without exceeding existing road capacity is then calculated (assuming no additional through traffic). 
E.  Building analysis. Similarly, the maximum number of dwelling units that are permitted under existing zoning can be calculated and then compared with existing unused capacity from he last step. 
4.  Development agreements. 
A.  In the event the report or the zoning administrator or department designee's analysis indicates that the unimproved road is not adequate, lacks capacity to carry additional traffic volumes, or falls below the county's level of service standards, the applicant and the county may enter into a development agreement, pursuant to which the applicant shall agree to provide the necessary public facility or facilities at the applicant's sole cost and expense, to service the proposed development in accordance with the provisions of this section. The development agreement shall provide that all such public facilities shall be constructed or bonded prior to the issuance of a building permit for all or any portion of the proposed development. 
B.  The county authorizes and delegates to the chairman of the board of commissioners to authorization to enter into a development agreement with an applicant pursuant to this section only if the chairman finds that the proposed development which is the subject of this section meets all requirements of this section, the county zoning regulations, the county subdivision regulations, and all other applicable regulations. Further, the county hereby authorizes the chairman of the board of commissioners to execute a development agreement (s) and otherwise to perform all acts necessary to deliver binding development agreements for the completion and installation of necessary public facility(s). 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 5.0; Res. of 7-13-99(1), § II; Res. of 4-11-00(1); Ord. of 10-16-01(1), § 1; Ord. of 3-5-02(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-6-02(1), § 1; Ord. of 8-6-02(2); Ord. of 10-19-04(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-19-04(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-5-05(1), § 2) 
Sec. 102-6. - Establishment of districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the unincorporated area of the county is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
Agricultural (A); 
Low Density Residential (R-1); 
Medium Density Residential (R-2); 
High Density Residential (R-3); 
Multi-Family Residential (MFR); 
Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS); 
Higher Density Detached Residential (HDDR); 
Commercial (C); 
Industrial (I); 
Office and Institutional (OI); and 
Technology Park District. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 6.0) 
Sec. 102-7. - Location and boundaries of zoning districts. 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the map or maps excerpted therefrom entitled "The Carroll County Zoning Map" which are hereby made and incorporated into this chapter by reference, which may be amended from time to time and which shall be kept in the office of the county commissioner chairman. The official county zoning map shall be available for public inspection in said office. 
7.1.  Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in the county, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot, except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 50 feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
(4)  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets, that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
(5)  Undeveloped property which has been deannexed from any municipality or other county will be subject to the same zoning district, including any conditions prior to annexation. However, if the zoning district within the county cannot be determined from existing records or by the county planner, a public hearing, as specified in this chapter before the planning commission, will be conducted to establish the appropriate zoning classification for the property. Any lawfully developed, deannexed property shall be zoned to the nearest compatible zoning district in which the use is permitted. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 7.0) 
Sec. 102-8. - Use requirements by districts. 
8.1.  Agricultural — (A). This district is intended to preserve the open character of certain land within the county and to promote development of a type which does not require extensive public facilities and services. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Agricultural (A) District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Single family dwelling or two family dwellings (duplex), both conventional and manufactured. 
b.  Commercial forest, agriculture, dairying, poultry and livestock raising provided that buildings used for housing fowls or animals or processing products not be located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
c.  Non-commercial agriculture, poultry, dairying, horse and livestock raising and greenhouses, as an accessory use to a permitted residential dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof. 
d.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures. 
e.  Public utility structures, buildings and land. 
f.  Accessory uses and buildings. 
g.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities 
h.  Privately owned day nurseries, pre-schools, and kindergartens. 
i.  Churches, similar places of worship, and one family burial plot satisfying the requirements and specifications of section 5.15. 
j.  Clubs, private and public, including golf and country clubs, fishing and hunting clubs and other similar enterprises 
k.  Development of natural resources including the removal of minerals and natural materials provided that no machinery used for such purposes be located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
l.  Commercial processing of animal products provided that no machinery or housing used for such purposes be located closer than 750 feet to any property line; such processing does not include slaughter houses. 
m.  Reserved. 
2.  Conditional Uses. Within any Agricultural (A) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Secondary detached residences for rent, hire, let, or lease provided that all applicable health department regulations and building codes are met. 
c.  Kennels. 
d.  Hospitals, nursing homes, and charitable or philanthropic institutions. 
e.  Athletic fields, commercial recreation areas, including golf driving ranges, swimming pools, private airplane landing fields and accessory facilities. 
f.  Special events facility, limited to either a small special events facility, intermediate special events facility, or large special events facility. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any Agricultural (A) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum setback line: 125 feet. 
b.  Lot area: Four acres. 
c.  Setback requirements — Minimum. 
d.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
County Road — 100 feet. 
e.  Side — 15 feet. 
f.  Rear — 15 feet. 
8.2.  Low Density Residential (R-1). This district is intended to provide for a higher density use than other areas and is situated in places convenient to streets and commercial areas. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Low Density Residential (R-1) District the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  One family conventional dwellings; 
b.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
c.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
d.  Accessory uses and buildings; 
e.  Churches and similar places of worship; 
f.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
g.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
2.  Conditional Uses. Within any Low Density Residential (R-1) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, and livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
b.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
c.  Reserved; 
d.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
e.  Secondary detached residential dwellings; 
f.  Principal use signs; and 
g.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof 
3.  Porches at exterior doors 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district, and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any Low Density Residential (R-1) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum building setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: Three acres. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum 
a.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
County Road — 90 feet; 
Subdivision Street — 75 feet. 
b.  Side — 15 feet. 
c.  Rear — 20 feet. 
8.3.  Medium Density Residential (R-2). This district is intended to provide for a higher density use than other areas and is situated in places convenient to streets and commercial areas. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Medium Density Residential (R-2) District the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  One family conventional dwellings; 
b.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
c.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
d.  Accessory uses and buildings; 
e.  Churches and similar places of worship; 
f.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
g.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any Medium Density Residential (R-2) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, and livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
b.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
c.  Reserved; 
d.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
e.  Secondary detached residential dwellings; 
f.  Principal use signs; and 
g.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof 
3.  Porches at exterior doors 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district, and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any Medium Density Residential (R-2) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum building setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: One acre. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum 
a.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
County Road — 90 feet; 
Subdivision Street — 75 feet. 
b.  Side — 15 feet. 
c.  Rear — 20 feet. 
8.4.  High Density Residential (R-3). This District is intended to provide for a higher density use than other areas and is situated in placed convenient to streets and commercial areas. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any High Density Residential (R-3) District the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  One family conventional dwellings; 
b.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
c.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
d.  Principal use signs; and 
e.  Reserved. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any High Density Residential (R-3) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, and livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
b.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
c.  Reserved; 
d.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
e.  Secondary detached residential dwellings; and 
f.  Principal use signs. 
g.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
(1)  Permanent masonry foundation 
(2)  Pitched, shingled roof 
(3)  Porches at exterior doors 
(4)  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district, and 
(5)  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any High Density Residential (R-3) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum building setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: One-half acre where public water or sewerage is available. One acre where no public water or sewerage is available. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum. 
a.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
County Road — 90 feet; 
Subdivision Street — 75 feet. 
b.  Side — 15 feet. 
c.  Rear — 20 feet. 
d.  Accessory uses and buildings; 
e.  Churches and similar places of worship; 
f.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
g.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
8.5.  Multi-Family Residential (MFR). This District is intended to provide suitable locations for apartments and other multi-family dwelling units such as townhouses, condominiums, and group housing. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Multi-Family Residential (MFR) District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  One family conventional dwellings; 
b.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
c.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
d.  Accessory use and buildings; 
e.  Churches, and similar places of worship; 
f.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
g.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
h.  Multi-Family Residential dwelling units such as apartments, row houses, townhouses, patio homes, rooming houses, boarding houses, group homes, and duplexes. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any Multi-Family Residential (MFR) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, an livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
b.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
c.  Reserved; 
d.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
e.  Secondary detached residential dwellings; 
f.  Principal use signs; and 
g.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof 
3.  Porches at exterior doors 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district, and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any MultiFamily Residential (MFR) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum setback line: 150 feet plus an additional five feet for every unit over four. 
b.  Lot area: One-half acre per dwelling unit where public water or sewerage is available. One acre per dwelling unit where no public water or sewerage is available. Ten dwelling units per acre where public water and sewerage is available. 
4.  Yard Requirements — Minimum. 
a.  Front — 50 feet plus five feet for each story over two stories. 
b.  Side — 20 feet plus five feet for each story over two stories. 
c.  Rear — 40 feet plus five feet for each story over two stories. 
8.6.  Manufactured Home Subdivisions (MHS). This district is intended to provide suitable locations for a higher density use than other areas and is situated in places convenient to streets and commercial areas and is intended primarily for the placement of manufactured homes. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS) District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation; 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof; 
3.  Porches at exterior doors; 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district; and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
b.  One family conventional dwellings; 
c.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
d.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
e.  Accessory use and buildings; 
f.  Churches, and similar places of worship; 
g.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
h.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
2.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, an livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
b.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
c.  Reserved; 
d.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
e.  Secondary detached residential dwellings; 
f.  Principal use signs; and 
g.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation; 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof; 
3.  Porches at exterior doors; 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district; and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. The following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum building setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: One-half acre where public water or sewerage is available One acre where no public water or sewerage is available. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum. 
a.  Front — Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
County Road — 90 feet; 
Subdivision Street — 75 feet; 
b.  Side — 15 feet; 
c.  Rear — 20 feet. 
8.7.  Higher Density Detached Residential (HDDR). This district is intended to provide suitable locations for higher density detached dwellings within the county and would specifically include manufactured home parks: 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any High Density Detached Residential District the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Dwellings and/or spaces within a lot or parcel which are for rent or lease for dwellings. 
b.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding the raising of poultry or livestock, as an accessory use to a dwelling and for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof. 
c.  Office and maintenance buildings incidental to a manufactured home park. 
d.  Food stores and laundromats accessory to a manufactured home park only. 
e.  Accessory buildings. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any Higher Density Detached Residential (HDDR) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  One family conventional dwellings; secondary detached residential dwellings; 
b.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures; 
c.  Public utility structures, buildings and land; 
d.  Accessory use and buildings; 
e.  Churches, and similar places of worship; 
f.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities serving residential areas; and 
g.  Non-commercial agriculture, excluding poultry, horse and livestock raising as an accessory use to one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of occupants thereof. 
h.  Non-commercial poultry, horse, an livestock raising and greenhouses as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof, provided that all related accessory buildings are located in the side or rear yards; 
i.  Privately operated day nurseries, preschools, and kindergartens; 
j.  Reserved; 
k.  Commercial horticultural activities; 
l.  Principal use signs; and 
m.  Manufactured homes designed, manufactured, and installed to give the appearance of a one family conventional dwelling. Such appearance would ordinarily include: 
1.  Permanent masonry foundation; 
2.  Pitched, shingled roof; 
3.  Porches at exterior doors; 
4.  A floor space commensurate with adjacent dwellings located within the district; and 
5.  Exterior appearance of either wood or masonry. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. 
a.  The lot shall have an area of not less than ten acres with a frontage of not less than 300 feet on a public road. 
b.  Each dwelling unit space shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet where septic tanks are utilized. Where a common sewerage system is utilized the dwelling unit space sizes may be reduced to 8,000 square feet minimum. 
c.  On each individual dwelling unit space within a Higher Density Detached Residential District there shall be a minimum 15-foot front yard and a minimum 10-foot rear and side yard. 
d.  No dwelling unit or accessory building in a Higher Density Detached Residential District shall be placed nearer than 75 feet to any public street right-of-way line or 40 feet to any property line. 
4.  Conditions of operation. 
a.  No dwelling unit shall be located in a Higher Density Detached Residential District until all the improvements required are complete and both preliminary and final plats have been approved pursuant to the county subdivision regulations and the county health department. If approval has been given to develop the Higher Density Detached Residential in sections then only those sections which are completed may be occupied by dwelling units. 
b.  No dwelling unit shall be occupied until the proper decals, if any, have been secured from the tax collector and displayed in a proper manner. 
c.  Drives. Paved drives at least 20 feet wide, which serve as the principal means of ingress and egress to and from the dwelling unit spaces, shall be provided to each dwelling unit and to laundry or other service buildings and recreation areas. 
d.  Refuse collection stations shall be provided for all dwelling units served and shall be conveniently located for collection. Such station shall be constructed with a concrete floor. 
e.  Each dwelling unit within a Higher Density Detached Residential District shall have connection to public water if public water is available within 2,000 feet of the lot. 
f.  Each dwelling unit shall be placed on a firm block or other masonry foundation and/or supports with a curtain wall (skirting or underpinning) which extends from the ground to all exterior walls and encloses the underside of the dwelling unit. 
g.  At least two all-weather parking spaces shall be provided on each dwelling unit site. 
h.  Each Higher Density Detached Residential lot shall be landscaped with shade trees and exterior screen planting to provide and assure reasonable amenities of living and privacy characteristic of less dense living quarters. 
i.  All utility lines shall be underground on any lot within a Higher Density Detached Residential District which does not front on a public road when the individual dwelling unit sites are less than 20,000 square feet in size 
j.  A manufactured home to be placed in a Higher Density Detached Residential District must meet the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. Compliance with this provision may be demonstrated by H.U.D. approval or by inspection by the county building inspector. 
k.  Additions may be constructed upon, adjacent to, or over dwelling units as herein defined provided that a building permit is obtained for such additions and the additions comply with all applicable ordinances. 
l.  Except as provided herein each dwelling unit space within the lot shall be designed to comply with the county subdivision regulations. 
8.8.  Commercial (C). This district is intended to provide suitable locations for retail stores and other commercial services. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Commercial (C) District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
a.  Retail business, retail stores, business or personal service establishments, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises, provided such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business. 
b.  Indoor amusement enterprises, including theater, bowling alleys and skating rinks. 
c.  Offices and clinics. 
d.  Principal use signs. 
e.  Motels and hotels. 
f.  Automobile and manufactured home sales. 
g.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
h.  Restaurants and other retail food establishments. 
i.  Clubs and lodges, private and public. 
j.  Churches and other places of worship. 
k.  Publicly owned and operated buildings and lands. 
l.  Public utility structures and land. 
m.  Commercial cemeteries. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any Commercial (C) District, the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Outdoor theater provided the theater screens are not visible from an existing road, residence, or thoroughfare. 
b.  Warehousing, wholesaling, storage, and truck terminals, provided all outdoor storage areas are enclosed with a solid fence or buffer strip. 
c.  Conference/convention center and special events facility. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any Commercial (C) District, the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: One-half acre where public water or sewerage is available. One acre where no public water or sewerage is available. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum. 
a.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 125 feet; 
All Other Roads or Street — 100 feet 
b.  Side. Fifteen feet except that where a commercial building abuts a residential district or a side street there shall be a side yard of not less than 30 feet. 
c.  Rear. Fifteen required except that where a commercial building abuts a residential district there shall be a rear yard of not less than 50 feet. 
8.9.  Industrial (I). The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for industrial development. All uses in the Industrial (I) District shall be constructed, maintained, and operated so as not to be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazard or glare: Within 200 feet of a residential district, all processes and storage (except of vehicles) shall be in enclosed buildings. 
1.  Permitted uses. Within any Industrial (I) District the following use shall be permitted: 
a.  Construction or contractors yards. 
b.  Storage or warehousing facilities. 
c.  Offices. 
d.  Retail, service, and wholesale businesses. 
e.  Motels and hotels. 
f.  Building materials, storage or wholesaling. 
g.  Truck terminals. 
h.  Automotive, farm implement, manufactured home, and trailer sales, service and repair. 
i.  Bottling plants or dairies. 
j.  Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, repair, or servicing of any product or commodity except fertilizer or explosives. 
k.  Restaurants. 
l.  Public utility structures and lands. 
m.  Public buildings. 
n.  Principal use and outdoor advertising signs. 
2.  Conditional uses. Within any Industrial (I) District the following uses may be permitted after application to the governing authority: 
a.  Automobile wrecking and junk yards when screened with a solid fence, wall, or natural screening of such height as will screen all junk or other materials or vehicles from the view of any adjacent property -owner or from any public road provided that such fence be at least ten feet from any street right-of-way or any zone district boundary. 
b.  Manufacture of fertilizer or explosives. 
c.  Bulk storage of petroleum products. 
d.  Airports. 
e.  Landfills, sewage treatment facilities, or other waste disposal sites. 
3.  Lot size — Minimum. Within any Industrial (I) District the following minimum lot sizes are required: 
a.  Lot width at minimum setback line: 100 feet. 
b.  Lot area: One acre. 
4.  Yard requirements — Minimum. 
a.  Front. Setback from center line of: 
State or Federal Highway — 100 feet; 
Other Public Road or Street — 75 feet 
b.  Side. Thirty feet. 
c.  Rear. Thirty feet. 
[8.10]  [Reserved.] 
8.11  Technology Park (TP). 
8.11.1. Purpose. The Technology Park District is established for the development of higher echelon technology and business development seeking to develop separate facilities for management headquarters, training areas, low-impact light manufacturing, motion picture, television and other multi-media production research and development operations and offices. Such facilities are often grouped together in order to provide common amenities, such as adequate and convenient parking, service, utilities and a park-like, harmonious atmosphere free from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare and other objectionable features. Operations shall cause no radiation or radioactivity at any exterior wall and no electrical radiation that affects any operation or equipment other than those of the creator of the radiation. The establishment of such a district requires a predetermined development plan, appropriate screening, adequate separation from other land uses and more stringent controls. It is the primary intent of this district to allow for such areas in order to meet contemporary needs. 
8.11.2. Principally permitted uses. The following uses, if conducted within an enclosed building or buildings, shall be permitted in TPD districts: 
A.  Administrative operations (finance, insurance). 
B.  Commercial printing. 
C.  Commercial testing laboratories. 
D.  Communications equipment Mfg. 
E.  Computer and electronic repair and calibration. 
F.  Computer operations and data processing. 
G.  Corporate offices or headquarters. 
H.  Design and engineering. 
I.  Drugs and pharmaceuticals distribution and/or Mfg. 
J.  Educational services. 
K.  Electronic components Mfg. 
L.  Hospitals, clinics, medical and dental offices, medical and dental laboratories, and veterinary clinics. 
M.  Industrial controls Mfg. (used in industrial production for controlling equipment or machines). 
N.  Management and professional services. 
O.  Metalworking machinery production. 
P.  Motion picture, television and other multi-media production. 
Q.  Office machines Mfg. 
R.  Office/research. 
S.  Public/Govt. buildings. 
T.  Pilot plants and production facilities. 
U.  Plastic, composite products Mfg. 
V.  Research and development Mfg. 
W.  Special industry machinery Mfg. 
X.  Transportation equipment Mfg. 
Y.  Unlisted use. The director may approve an unlisted use in this zoning district where the unlisted use is similar in type and nature to a listed use in that district. 
8.11.3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
A.  Employee lunch rooms. 
B.  Temporary outside storage if the same is in conjunction with pilot plants or production facility uses, subject to being screened from adjoining properties. 
C.  Recreational facilities for use by tenants, employees and clients. 
D.  Private temporary living quarters associated with research and development 
E.  Storage facilities within wholly enclosed buildings. 
F.  Trash receptacles. 
G.  Telecommunication structures shall be required to follow section 102-5. 
H.  On-site day care provided by businesses within the park for employees. 
8.11.4. Maximum height of structures. In the TP district, no principal building or accessory structure shall be erected to exceed a height of 50 feet. 
8.11.5. Minimum yard standards. 
A.  The minimum planned TP district area size shall be 20 acres. 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
2.  Minimum set-back requirements shall be as follows: 

 
3.  Lot width (measured at the setback building line) shall be a minimum of 100 feet. 
4.  For corner lots, the building setback from both street right-of-way lines shall be 50 feet. 
5.  Buildings and other improvements shall be placed so that the existing topography and landscape shall be disturbed as little as possible and so that the maximum number of desirable trees and other natural features will be preserved to the existent possible; however required grading shall be allowed with plantings to restore buffer. 
6.  All lighting, except streetlights, whether affixed to a structure or free-standing shall be designed so that the lamp is not visible to an observer at an elevation equal to or greater than the ground line below the light source from any point more than five feet inside the adjacent property. All lights shall be directed downwards and shall not cast a cone of light that is greater than 120 degrees total or greater than 60 degrees from vertical. 
7.  Parking requirements. 
A.  Orientation. Parking should promote clear circulation patterns. Parking areas are encouraged to be located on the side or behind buildings and should not be the primary visual focus on the site. 
B.  Amount and type. 
1.  Parking shall be provided at a minimum rate of one space per employee on site during the largest shift of operation. Where appropriate the county shall accept the institute of transportation engineers parking generation manual most current edition. 
2.  Joint parking areas serving multiple sites/uses may be permitted with cross parking easements. 
3.  Parking areas shall not be used for external storage, vehicular storage or for long-term parking; 
4.  Handicap accessible parking shall be provided in conformance with law. 
5.  Parking areas shall be setback ten feet from right-of-way. Parking areas shall not extend into buffer areas. 
6.  Environmentally friendly parking lot concepts shall be permitted within the Technology Park. 
7.  Unloading shall be onsite and not within the right-of-way. 
8.11.6. Landscape buffering. Landscaping for TP district shall be as follows: 
A.  General purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety morals, and general welfare of the residents of the community by providing for open space, visual screening and landscape buffers to remove, reduce, lessen or absorb the shock of impact of incompatible uses of real properties between one use or zone district and another. 
B.  Specific intent. The intent of this section is: 
1.  To create a park-like environment conducive to the permitted uses; 
2.  To extend space or to screen undesirable views, to reduce the impact of the one land use upon another; 
3.  To increase soil water retention through landscape requirements; 
4.  To protect and preserve the appearance and property values of residential uses from adverse effects of adjoining nonresidential uses; and 
5.  To enhance careful land use planning and not be considered as a substitute for it. 
C.  General provisions. 
1.  Landscape buffering may include, but shall not be limited to, trees, shrubs, bushes, grass cover, earth berms or a combination thereof. 
2.  Screening shall consist of plant material. 
3.  Buffering is the act of enhancing or lessening the impact of one area on another. 
a.  Location and width. 
Bufferyards: A minimum 40-foot bufferyard shall be maintained separating the TP property from residential uses. The bufferyard may be planted, natural, or a combination thereof, unless varied by the zoning board of appeals. 
b.  Use. Designed buffered areas shall be used for no other purpose than planting or screening, except necessary ingress to or egress from the buffered area. 
c.  Design. A buffered area shall be designed to allow for access to easements in order to perform the functions for which such easements were granted and for fire protection purposes. 
4.  Fencing and walls are not desirable and may be used only as needed for screening and limited storage areas. Natural architectural elements of extension from the building may be used for screening. Earth mounding is encouraged to be used in screening applications and where aesthetic values could be gained in their placement. 
8.12.  Office and Institutional District (OI). 
1.0  Purpose. The intent of this district is to permit and encourage business, office, institutional, or specified public purpose development with very limited retail sale of goods incidental to a permitted use. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and uncongested environment for office type business or professional firms and certain public uses; and to discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns, or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial, institutional and housing character of the district. 
2.0  Permitted uses. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building may be devoted to storage. The following uses shall be permitted within an office/institutional district: 
(1)  Professional offices such as those for engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, opticians (including the sale of eyewear as an accessory to professional eye examinations), psychologists or social workers. 
(2)  Business offices, such as those for realtors, insurance agents, stock brokers, employment agencies, advertising or public relations agencies, public opinion and other research firms, and national, regional, state and local office headquarters for commercial, manufacturing, charitable or other corporations or organizations. 
(3)  Educational institutions; including colleges and universities, business schools, trade/vocational schools, professional schools, and technical schools. 
(4)  Governmental offices and governmental services. 
(5)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(6)  Hospitals, nursing homes, personal care homes, rest homes and hospices (including an apothecary shop as an accessory use). 
(7)  Church or any other place of worship. 
(8)  Clubs and lodges catering exclusively to their members and guests. 
(9)  Financial services/institutions. 
(10)  Funeral homes. 
(11)  Museums and libraries. 
(12)  Artist studios for crafts, dance, drama, music, and photography. 
(13)  Radio and/or television studio, excluding towers and antennae which do not meet the height restrictions of this district. 
(14)  Manufacturers' representatives offices; provided no goods are offered for sale at retail. 
(15)  Animal hospitals/veterinary offices; outside animal pens and runs are not allowed. 
3.0  Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings and uses to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory buildings and uses exclude retail business and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses and that include only those buildings and uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. Separate accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only. No outside storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted in an office/institutional district. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building may be devoted to storage. 
4.0  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted, subject to review and approval of a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Residential dwellings and home occupations. 
(2)  Day care facilities. 
(3)  Restaurant, not including drive-in restaurant. 
(4)  Cemeteries and other facilities for disposal of the deceased. 
5.0  Dimensional requirements. The following development dimensions are permitted in an office/institutional district: 
5.1  Minimum lot area. 
1.  Five thousand square feet where public water and sewerage is available. 
2.  Twenty thousand square feet where public water or sewerage is available. 
3.  Forty thousand square feet where no public water or sewerage is available. 
5.2  Minimum lot width. One hundred feet at minimum building setback line. 
5.3  Minimum yard requirements. 
1.  Front setbacks. Forty feet as measured from the right-of-way line of an adjoining roadway. 
2.  Side yard setbacks. Interior side yards shall be 15 feet except where an office/institutional building abuts a residential district there shall be a side yard of no less than 30 feet. Side yards adjacent to a street or highway shall be measured from the right-of-way. 
3.  Rear yard setbacks. Fifteen feet except where an office/institutional building abuts a residential district there shall be a rear yard of no less than 50 feet. 
5.4  Maximum height. Buildings and structures shall be no more than 35 feet tall. 
5.5  Maximum lot coverage. The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 60 percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 8.0; Res. of 10-13-98(1); Res. of 10-13-98(2); Res. of 7-13-99(1), §§ III, IV; Res. of 4-11-00(1); Ord. of 10-16-01(1), § 1; Ord. of 3-5-02(1), § 1; Ord. of 5-5-15(1); Ord. of 11-1-16(1); Ord. of 7-11-17(1), § 1) 
Sec. 102-9. - Miscellaneous districts/use requirements/procedure. 
9.1.  Office and Institutional District (OI). 
1.0  Purpose. The intent of this district is to permit and encourage business, office, institutional, or specified public purpose development with very limited retail sale of goods incidental to a permitted use. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and uncongested environment for office type business or professional firms and certain public uses; and to discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns, or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial, institutional and housing character of the district. 
2.0  Permitted uses. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building may be devoted to storage. The following uses shall be permitted within an office/institutional district: 
(1)  Professional offices such as those for engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, opticians (including the sale of eyewear as an accessory to professional eye examinations), psychologists or social workers. 
(2)  Business offices, such as those for realtors, insurance agents, stock brokers, employment agencies, advertising or public relations agencies, public opinion and other research firms, and national, regional, state and local office headquarters for commercial, manufacturing, charitable or other corporations or organizations. 
(3)  Educational institutions; including colleges and universities, business schools, trade/vocational schools, professional schools, and technical schools. 
(4)  Governmental offices and governmental services. 
(5)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(6)  Hospitals, nursing homes, personal care homes, rest homes and hospices (including an apothecary shop as an accessory use). 
(7)  Church or any other place of worship. 
(8)  Clubs and lodges catering exclusively to their members and guests. 
(9)  Financial services/institutions. 
(10)  Funeral homes. 
(11)  Museums and libraries. 
(12)  Artist studios for crafts, dance, drama, music, and photography. 
(13)  Radio and/or television studio, excluding towers and antennae which do not meet the height restrictions of this district. 
(14)  Manufacturers' representatives offices; provided no goods are offered for sale at retail. 
(15)  Animal hospitals/veterinary offices; outside animal pens and runs are not allowed. 
3.0  Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings and uses to the above permitted uses, provided that such accessory buildings and uses exclude retail business and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses and that include only those buildings and uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. Separate accessory structures may be located in the rear or side yards only. No outside storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted in an office/institutional district. No more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any building may be devoted to storage. 
4.0  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted, subject to review and approval of a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Residential dwellings and home occupations. 
(2)  Day care facilities. 
(3)  Restaurant, not including drive-in restaurant. 
(4)  Cemeteries and other facilities for disposal of the deceased. 
5.0  Dimensional requirements. The following development dimensions are permitted in an office/institutional district: 
5.1  Minimum lot area. 
1.  Five thousand square feet where public water and sewerage is available. 
2.  Twenty thousand square feet where public water or sewerage is available. 
3.  Forty thousand square feet where no public water or sewerage is available. 
5.2  Minimum lot width. One hundred feet at minimum building setback line. 
5.3  Minimum yard requirements. 
1.  Front setbacks. Forty feet as measured from the right-of-way line of an adjoining roadway. 
2.  Side yard setbacks. Interior side yards shall be 15 feet except where an office/institutional building abuts a residential district there shall be a side yard of no less than 30 feet. Side yards adjacent to a street or highway shall be measured from the right-of-way. 
3.  Rear yard setbacks. Fifteen feet except where an office/institutional building abuts a residential district there shall be a rear yard of no less than 50 feet. 
5.4  Maximum height. Buildings and structures shall be no more than 35 feet tall. 
5.5  Maximum lot coverage. The area of the footprint of all buildings and parking shall not exceed 60 percent of the total lot area. 
9.2.  Planned Unit Development District (PUD). 
Editor's note— Ord. of 3-1-16(1), § 1, repealed 102-9(9.2), in its entirety; and § 2 included the following provisions:  "The parcels currently holding Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning shall be grandfathered and such zoning is still applicable to such parcels. The grandfathered parcels identified on exhibit A hereto will be required to meet the regulations set forth in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) ordinance as amended in 2004 attached hereto as exhibit B." 
9.3.  Telecommunication Antennae and Tower Ordinance. 
1.0  Purpose. It is the intent of the county board of commissioners, referred to in additional places in this chapter as the governing authority, that the provisions of this chapter be construed to ensure compatibility of proposed facilities with surrounding areas by establishing standards for location, height, structural integrity, design review, landscaping, and visual screening; to sustain the peaceful character of the county by establishing standards to reduce the potential of wireless communication facilities to produce disruptive noise, vibration, or illumination; and to assist in identification of potential sources of interference with existing telephone, radio, television or electronic computing system currently in use in the area; and to reduce the apparent quantity of telecommunication structures by providing incentives to utilize co-location and stealth technologies, thereby lessening adverse visual impacts of these facilities on developed residential areas, agricultural areas, and natural surroundings, to facilitate the use of public property and to enhance the ability of providers of telecommunication services to provide such service to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently. 
This chapter is intended to allow telecommunication structures which are sufficient to allow adequate service to citizens, the traveling public, and others within the county; and to accommodate the need for connection of such services to telecommunication structures in adjacent and surrounding communities. 
2.0  Definitions. 
2.1  Rules. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "structure" shall be synonymous with "tower" but not include the word "building" or "enclosure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
2.2  Use of definitions. Any word not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. If not defined elsewhere in the zoning ordinance the word will have the meaning as defined in the latest edition of Webster's College Dictionary, the definition to read in context with the purposes and provisions of the part of the ordinance it is being used to define. 
2.3  Definitions. 
Antenna array means a mounted exterior apparatus designed for the transmission or reception of wireless communications or data. Types of antenna arrays include a system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices for telephonic, radio, or television communication. 
Alternative tower structure means man made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, flag or light poles, signs, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antenna or towers. An alternative tower structure may have an antenna array and be affixed to an existing building, overhead facilities, or the like. 
Broadcasting tower means a use associated with a commercial radio or television enterprise that emits radio signals to project transmissions. 
Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which the same is situated. A building is further defined as any enclosure with a roof intended for shelter or closure. 
Co-location/site sharing means this term shall mean use of a common telecommunication structure or common site by two or more telecommunications providers or by one telecommunications provider for more than one type of antenna or technology. Co-location and site sharing is also the placement of an antenna array on a structure owned or operated by a telecommunications carrier. 
Comprehensive plan means a plan, as amended from time to time, that was devised to provide the county with a guide for the future growth and development in accordance with the Georgia Planning Act. 
County means Carroll County. 
County planner means officer having the primary responsibility to administer the county zoning ordinance. 
County property means all real property owned by the county, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined elsewhere in this ordinance, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the county. 
Equipment facility means any enclosure or building used to contain ancillary equipment such as poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables and wires located under, on or above the surface of the ground and used for the telecommunications structure. Equipment facilities include but are not limited to, cabinet, shelters, a buildout of an existing support structure, pedestal and other similar enclosures. 
FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means Federal Communications Commission. 
Governing authority means the chairman and board of commissioners for the county. 
Lot width means the shortest distance between the side line of a lot, measured along the building setback line. 
Overhead facilities means utility poles, public utility facilities, electronic transmission lines, and other facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
Pre-existing telecommunications structure. See section 102-4(4.3). 
Public street means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the county which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to transportation purposes. 
Public utility means persons, corporations or government supplying gas, electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the general public. For the purpose of this chapter, telecommunications structures and telecommunications facilities, and support structures shall not be considered public utility uses, and are defined separately. 
Public utility structure means a structure that is essential to supply the public with a commodity or service and is associated with railroad companies, dock companies, terminal station companies, telephone and telegraph companies, gas or electric light and power companies, rapid rail passenger service lines, and waste treatment facilities. Specifically excluded from this definition are telecommunication structures and antenna arrays, including, but not limited to, self supporting lattice towers, guy towers, monopole towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower structures. 
Right-of-way means includes all public streets and utility easements, now or hereafter owned by the county, but only to the extent of the county's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements. 
Reviewing body means applicable board or commission having authority to make a recommendation or make an official decision on the application. 
Side yard means a yard adjacent to the front yard. 
State means the state of Georgia. 
Support structure means any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna arrays, including self supporting lattice towers, guy tower, or monopole tower. The term shall include, but is not limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier telephone towers and alternative tower structures. 
1.  Lattice tower is a wireless communication support structure which consists of vertical and horizontal supports and metal crossed strips or bars to support an antenna array and connecting appurtenances. Lattice towers may or may not be supported by guy wires. 
2.  Monopole tower is a wireless communication structure which consists of a single pole structure to support an antenna array and connecting appurtenances. 
3.  Guyed tower is any variety of support structures using wire guys connecting above grade portions of a communication support structure diagonally with the ground to provide support for a communications towers, antenna arrays, and connecting appurtenances. 
Surplus space means the portion of usable space on a support structure that has the necessary clearance from other users to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for an antenna array. 
Telecommunications Act means the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et. seq., as now and hereafter amended. 
Telecommunication carrier means persons that directly or indirectly own, control, operate, or manage equipment or property within the county, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunication service. 
Telecommunication provider means persons who provide telecommunication service through telecommunication structures without ownership or management control of the facilities. 
Telecommunication service means the providing or offering for rent, sale, lease or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic, video programming information, and wireless communications between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar media with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. 
Telecommunications structure means any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of telecommunication services, usually consisting of a support structure, antenna array, equipment facility and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
Wireless communications means any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1990, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, digital communications services, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
Zoning ordinance means the county zoning ordinance adopted in June 1987, as amended. 
3.0  General provisions. 
3.1  Application of a building permit for a telecommunications structure. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, or place any support structure, alternative tower structure, or antenna array without first making application for a telecommunications structure permit. To re-erect, replace, or repair any support structure an application for and issuance of a building permit by the county codes enforcement department is necessary. 
2.  Fees for telecommunications structure permits are posted in the fee schedule in the planning and zoning office of the county and approved by the board of commissioners. 
3.2  Building permit exemptions. Adding antenna arrays or appurtenances, including equipment facilities, as long as the same does not increase noise, height, light or visual disturbance to the community. Building permits are not required when adjusting or replacing worn or used antenna arrays to existing telecommunications structures provided the replacement does not reduce any safety device. 
3.3  Public property. A telecommunications carrier requesting to place at least one telecommunications structure on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the governing authority must enter into a license or lease approved by the governing authority. 
1.  For each application for a building permit for a telecommunications structure for placement on public property, the application must comport to the following procedure: 
a.  Notice of the application and approximate location of the structure shall be advertised in the legal organ for a period not less that 15 days prior to a hearing before the board of commissioners. At such hearing, the application shall be accepted if at least four affirmative votes are received in favor of its placement. 
b.  The property shall be posted with a sign containing the name of the applicant, the day of the hearing, and state the purpose for placement of a proposed telecommunication structure for the site. 
2.  The applicant shall be required to submit those documents listed in section 102-7 et seq., (conditional use permits). 
3.  In the event the applicant proposes to vary from the setbacks, maximum height, size, separation requirements, or any development standard of this chapter, the applicant must comply with section 102-8 et seq., (variance from standards). 
3.4  Requirements for a building permit to construct a telecommunications structure. 
1.  Complete application to planning and zoning office in the county administrative office building. 
2.  Applications must include: 
a.  Site plan which includes: north arrow, location of tower on site, topography of site, setbacks, height of structure, equipment facilities, access to site, adjacent roads and adjacent property. 
b.  Applicant shall certify in writing that the proposed telecommunications structure meets all FAA and FCC standards and regulations. 
c.  Aerial photo of the parcel from the county tax maps. 
d.  A general description of the geographic area that the telecommunications structure will provide coverage. 
e.  Any information that is required by other sections in this chapter. 
f.  Potential for co-location on the support structure. 
3.5  Setbacks. Support structures and alternative towers structures shall conform to the following setback requirements: 
1.  In agricultural districts, support structures must be set back a minimum of the greater of 100 feet or 50 percent of tower height from the right-of-way and nearest property line. 
2.  In residential districts, towers must be set back a minimum of the greater of 100 feet or 50 percent of tower height plus one additional foot for each one foot of tower height in excess of 85 feet from the right-of-way and nearest occupied structure. 
3.  In commercial and office/institutional districts, support structures must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way and 20 feet from each property line. 
4.  In industrial districts, support structures must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way and 20 feet from any property line. 
3.6  Setbacks for alternative tower structures. Alternative tower structures shall not mount antennae array or appurtenances so as to extend over property lines. 
3.7  Security fencing. A telecommunications structure, except alternative tower structures, shall be enclosed by a security fence of not less than six feet in height and equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; a three strand barbed wire or rolled razor wire attached to a security fence is an appropriate anti-climbing device. However, the governing authority reserves the right to impose stricter measures, as it deems appropriate; nothing herein shall prevent fencing which is necessary to meet other requirements of state and federal regulations. 
3.8  Structural integrity. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that the tower withstands a 100 m.p.h. wind, six-inch snow load, and is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the electronic industries association/telecommunications industries standards for steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures (or equivalent), as amended. If upon inspection, a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, then upon notice being provided to the tower's owner, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the governing authority may have the structure removed at owner's expense. 
4.0  Supplemental regulations. 
4.1  Interference with public safety telecommunications. 
1.  No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the county codes enforcement director in writing at least ten calendar days in advance of such changes. 
2.  Applicants for a telecommunications structure shall be required to provide information on the projected power density of the facility. 
3.  All telecommunications structures must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government having authority over telecommunication structures and frequencies. 
4.2  Abandonment. A telecommunications structure may be determined to be abandoned because of discontinued use or falling into disrepair or noncompliance because of neglect of maintenance according to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
1.  Abandonment because of discontinued use. A telecommunication structure shall be determined to be abandoned if the structure becomes more than 25 percent damaged and the owner fails to repair the same within six months or if the structure falls into a like disrepair from vandalism, neglect, or collapse so as to discontinue all telecommunications service for a period of nine months. Within 90 days after notice from the governing authority that a structure has been considered abandoned, the owner of the structure shall either reestablish use of the site or remove all equipment, support structures and appurtenances. 
2.  Abandonment due to disrepair or noncompliance. In the event a telecommunications structure falls into disrepair or noncompliance because of neglect of maintenance, the facility shall be determined to be abandoned if repairs are not affected to restore compliance within 30 days after written notice of noncompliance from the codes enforcement officer. Failure to comply within 30 days shall result in expiration by limitation of prior approvals for the facility. 
3.  Expiration of prior approvals. Any proposal to reestablish the telecommunication structure after failure to comply with restoration of facilities because of disrepair or neglect, shall be treated as a new application subject to reviews, approvals and fees required by this chapter. 
4.  Liability for noncompliance. No time period stated herein shall relieve the owner of a telecommunication structure from responsibility to maintain a safe facility. 
5.  If applicable, a copy of relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is not removed at the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the governing authority and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
4.3  Pre-existing telecommunications structures. 
4.3.1 Definition. A pre-existing telecommunication structures is a telecommunication structure which exists on the date of the adoption of this chapter. A pre-existing telecommunications structure is subject to the following provisions: 
1.  The telecommunications structure may continue in use for the purpose then used, but may not be expanded without complying with this chapter, except as expressly provided in this section. 
2.  The telecommunications structure may add additional antenna arrays and equipment facilities subject to the conditions in this chapter. 
3.  The telecommunications structure that is hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit as described herein. 
4.3.2 The owner of any pre-existing telecommunications structure may replace, repair, rebuild, and/or expand such telecommunications structure in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate co-located antenna arrays or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological, or communications standards without having to conform to the provisions of this chapter, so long as such facilities are not increased in height by more than 15 percent and/or setbacks are not decreased by more than 15 percent. 
4.3.3 Modifications. In the event the owner of any pre-existing telecommunications structure wants to replace, repair, rebuild, and/or expand such telecommunications structure so as to increase the height by more than 15 percent or decrease the setbacks by more than 15 percent, the owner must apply for a conditional use permit unless the telecommunications structure is located in an industrial zone. 
4.4  Two-way radio qualification. A single-owner using two-way radio technology shall not be required to obtain a conditional use permit for a telecommunications structure where: 
1.  The support structure has a height of less than 100 feet and a diameter of less than 24 inches, the diameter being measured at the greatest point; 
2.  The property is located in a commercial or industrial district; and 
3.  The telecommunications structure is a single-user structure. 
4.  The landscaping and setback requirements in this chapter shall not apply to a telecommunications structure as described by subsections 4.4 1., 2., and 3. where the telecommunications structure is located within a distance of five feet, as measured from the supports structure, from the rear or side of the primary structure on the property. 
5.0  Development standards for telecommunications structures. A conditional use permit is required for telecommunications structures in all zoning districts except industrial, and except as provided in section 4.4. However, no permit shall be required for co-location of additional antenna arrays on existing telecommunications structures; provided the co-location does not increase the height of the existing support structure, and the proposed addition otherwise complies with standards described herein. 
5.1  Design requirements. 
1.  Camouflage and color required. Whenever practical and feasible, support structures and alternative tower structures shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the building on which the same is placed through the use of color and camouflaging treatments, except where color is otherwise dictated by federal or state authority. 
2.  Attachment to trees prohibited. It is prohibited to use any tree as a support for any telecommunications structures or antenna arrays, or to use any tree to attach any metal guy or cable supporting any antenna array. 
3.  Co-location. Whenever practical new telecommunications structures shall be designed, engineered, and constructed to facilitate co-location in surplus space by other telecommunications providers on the same structure. 
5.2  Landscape and buffer requirements. 
1.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible, provided, however, that vegetation which causes interference with the antenna array or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed. 
2.  Landscaping shall be designed from an approved list to screen the base of a support structure and equipment facilities from the view of adjacent properties and rights-of-way. To the greatest extent feasible, existing trees and other vegetation may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the code enforcement officer or the reviewing body. 
3.  Additional landscaping and buffer requirements: 
a.  In residential and agricultural zones. A perimeter buffer having a depth of 20 feet is required, with a minimum of one tree per 20 lineal feet of buffer, with a minimum of 50 percent being shade trees. Retention of existing trees on site in order to meet this requirement is encouraged. Grass or other ground cover species shall be planted on all areas of the buffer strip required which are not covered by other landscape material. 
b.  In office/institutional and commercial districts, a perimeter buffer having a depth of 15 feet shall be required with the same requirements set forth in subsection 3.a. 
c.  In industrial districts, a ten-foot buffer shall be required with the same requirements set forth in section 3.a. 
4.  Maintenance. It will be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to keep all landscaping material free from disease and properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose for which it was established. The owners of the property and any tenant on the property on which buffers and landscaping are required, shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the buffer and landscape area free from litter and debris, to keep planting healthy, and to keep planting areas neat in appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of the buffer or landscaping shall be replaced in the event that it dies. 
5.3  Lights. 
1.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by FAA or other applicable authority. Lighting may be required if the tower is near a non-FAA controlled landing strip pending review by the codes enforcement officer or reviewing body. If lighting is required, the tower shall not use strobe lights after sunset unless expressly required by the FAA. The reviewing body may consider the available lighting alternative and approve the design that causes the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
2.  Additional anti-climbing measures shall be utilized for support structures in residential districts when such structure has constructed thereon or attached thereto in any way any platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure. 
5.4  Noise. No equipment shall be operated at a telecommunications structure that produces noise levels above 45 dB as measured from any adjacent property or right-of-way line, except for emergency situations requiring the use of backup generator, during which noise levels may be exceeded on a temporary basis. No generator shall be used prior to commercial power being delivered to the site. 
5.5  Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information is prohibited. 
5.6  Electrical. Support structures and antenna arrays shall be designed to conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code as amended. 
5.7  Co-location efforts required. 
1.  A permittee shall cooperate with other telecommunications providers in co-locating additional antennae on support structures and/or on existing buildings provided said proposed co-locators have received a building permit to construct a telecommunications structure. A permittee shall exercise good faith in co-locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site. Such good faith shall include sharing technical information for evaluating the feasibility of co-location. 
2.  An applicant shall certify that it has taken reasonable efforts to develop a co-location alternative for its proposal. 
3.  Separation requirement. In zoning districts other than industrial or on public property, a telecommunications structure over 180 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing telecommunications structure that is over 180 feet in height, unless such location is determined to be a hardship by the reviewing body. 
5.8  Height requirements. 

 
6.0  Administrative review by codes enforcement officer. 
6.1  All applications for conditional use permits, variances, and applications to re-zone shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning commission of the county. 
6.2  Administrative review of the application shall insure the following: 
1.  Applicant has submitted ten copies of a complete application. 
2.  The proposal for the support structure does not exceed height or setback requirements, unless a variance is requested on the same. 
3.  Applicant has complied with all requirements set forth in this chapter to include, but not limited, to all buffers, landscape, color and camouflage requirements have been met, and limited or minimal adverse visual impact to surrounding community has been achieved. 
4.  Applicant has submitted all required documents, reports, and certifications as set forth in this chapter. 
5.  An applicant may apply for a conditional use permit and variance at the same time as long as all documentation is included and applicable requirements as set forth in this Code are met. 
Final approval by the codes enforcement officer, county planner, or his designee shall be in accordance with article 8 [section 102-10], (powers and duties of various officials) and article 9 [section 102-11], (administration and enforcement). 
7.0  Conditional use permits. 
7.1  Applications for a conditional use permit to construct a telecommunications structure shall include the following: 
1.  A report from a qualified engineer or engineering firm from which will include: 
a.  A scaled plan and a scaled elevation view, which includes a cross section and elevation, supporting drawings, calculations, documentation showing the location and dimensions of the communications structure(s), all improvements, and appurtenances associated therewith, including information concerning support structure specifications, antenna locations, equipment facilities, topography, radio frequency coverage, and tower height requirements. 
b.  Documentation of the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antenna arrays and the minimum separation distances between antenna arrays. 
c.  Description of the tower's capacity and power density, including the number and type of antennae that it can accommodate. 
d.  In lieu of submitting the requirements as set forth in subsection 1.a. above, the applicant may submit the manufacturer's detailed plans and specifications along with the manufacturer's certification that the telecommunications structure has been constructed according to the those plans and specifications. 
2.  A diagram or map showing the visual impact of the proposed facility, such may include photo simulations, drawings, or the like of the proposed facility from affected agricultural, residential, commercial properties, and rights-of-ways at distances of 500 feet and 1,500 feet. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of surrounding buildings and land uses of the zoning district to the extent consistent with the function of the communications equipment. A telecommunications structure shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical and be located so as to minimize the obstruction of scenic views from agriculturally and residentially zoned land. 
3.  Equipment facilities shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. If such facilities cannot be located in buildings, equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened and landscaped in conformance with this chapter. 
4.  A site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the telecommunications structure on the site. The plan shall show locations of existing structures, trees and other significant site features, and indicate type and location of plant materials used to screen telecommunications structure components and shall show proposed colors for the telecommunications structure. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
5.  A general description of the geographic area for which the telecommunications structure will provide coverage. 
6.  Information identifying radio frequencies to be transmitted and the projected power density of the telecommunications structure. 
7.  Air navigation information to include all private and public airfields, landing strips and runways within a five-mile radius of the proposed site. In the alternative, applicant shall certify that it has conducted an aeronautical study on the navigable airspace within a five-mile radius of the proposed site. 
8.  Statement of security. Applicant shall submit a diagram or information regarding the required fencing, an affirmation that all equipment shall be locked and secured to prevent unauthorized entry and a description how the structure is designed with anti-climbing features. 
9.  Certificate of insurance. Applicant must produce a certificate of insurance demonstrating protection against claims for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage in amounts not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 annual aggregate. 
10.  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna or tower shall provide to the county planner an inventory of existing towers which are within one-quarter-mile of the proposed site including location, height and design of surrounding structures. 
11.  Structural integrity. A report shall be submitted from a qualified and licensed professional engineer or engineering firm that demonstrates the tower's structural support exceeds all applicable wind and dead load standards. 
8.0  Variance from standards. 
8.1  The community development appeals board will have authority to grant an application for a variance in cases where strict adherence to height, size, setback, separation or other standards for communications structures and antenna will cause an applicant special difficulties that includes one or more than the following: 
1.  Preclude effective transmission or reception of signals, or 
2.  Results in conditions contrary to purposes of this chapter, or 
3.  Creates unnecessary hardship to the landowner, telecommunication carrier, or telecommunications providers. Said hardships shall be set forth in detail and presented in writing to the community development appeals board. 
8.2  Scope of variance for a telecommunications structure applies to: 
1.  Setbacks, maximum height, size, or separation requirements; or 
2.  Any other development standard, co-location requirement or other provisions of this chapter, when considered in conjunction with applicant's specific site request, where the community development appeals board finds such provisions inconsistent with purposes of these regulations or contrary to requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. If requested by the community development appeals board, applicant shall set forth the inconsistent provisions and contrary regulations in detail and present the same in writing to the community development appeals board. 
8.3  Approval of a request for a variance shall be narrowly construed and shall be based on an evaluation of the operational needs of the telecommunications provider, alternative locations and alternative tower structures upon which a proposed antenna array might be located, any co-location opportunities based upon applicant's good faith efforts respecting existing support towers within one-quarter-mile of the proposed site. Evidence shall demonstrate that no practical alternative is reasonably available to the applicant as balanced against any detrimental effect on the surrounding properties. 
8.4  Necessary findings for granting of a variance. A variance may be granted by the community development appeals board for antenna arrays and telecommunication structures upon finding of fact, as follows: 
1.  Nonresidential zoning districts such as OI (Office/Institutional), C (Commercial) or I (Industrial) may exceed applicable limits contained herein by variance based on findings of each of the following that a proposed antenna array, support structure, and related equipment facilities or appurtenances: 
a.  Is the least height and proximity to adjacent properties necessary to provide the coverage by the communications service provider and to achieve the purposes of this chapter, and 
b.  Employs all reasonable measures to provide the visual mitigation that screen the facility from views of adjacent residences or undeveloped residential properties, and 
c.  Will not produce noise, vibration, odors or illumination which will adversely impact other properties in the vicinity, and 
d.  By means of design or location does not present a hazard to adjacent properties, and 
e.  For reductions of setbacks for the telecommunications structure, the structure is designed and engineered, in the event of structural failure, not to fall beyond the radius of the reduced setback, and 
f.  Does not otherwise result in significant adverse impact on the property on which the facility is located, on other properties in the vicinity, or on the community in general. 
2.  Residential properties. A (Agriculture), R1, R2, R3, (Residential), MHS (Manufactured Home Subdivision), MFR (Multi Family Residential) or HDDR (High Density Residential), may exceed applicable limits contained herein by variance provided that: 
a.  Each of the above findings necessary for facilities in nonresidential district applies to agricultural and residential districts and provided that the community development appeals board may hold the applicant for a variance at a proposed site in a residential zone to a higher standard than nonresidential districts to demonstrate visual mitigation, elimination of potential adverse impacts and protection of health and safety necessary to preserve the agricultural and residential character of the community. 
9.0  Review procedure. 
9.1  Review of an application by the codes enforcement officer, or his designee, shall be in accordance with section 102-10, (powers and duties of various officials) and section 102-11, (administration and enforcement). 
9.2  Review of applicants by the community development appeals board shall be according to section 102-10, (powers and duties of various officials), section 102-11, (administration and enforcement) and section 102-13, (community development appeals board). 
9.3  Review of applications by the planning and zoning commission shall be in accordance with section section 102-10 (powers and duties of various officials), section 102-11, (administration and enforcement) and section 102-12, (planning and zoning commission). 
9.4  Review of applications by the carroll county board of commissioners shall be in accordance with section 102-10 (powers and duties of various officials), section 102-11, (administration and enforcement) and section 102-12, (planning and zoning commission), and section 102-14, (amendments). 
10.0  Criteria for review. 
10.1  The following criteria shall be used by the appropriate reviewing body when making an official decision on an application. 
1.  Determination of whether the applicant is in conformity with goals set forth in this chapter and the comprehensive plan. 
2.  Determination of whether the applicant has cooperated with other telecommunications providers in co-locating additional antenna on support structures and/or on existing buildings provided said proposed co-locators have received a telecommunications structure permit. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  A review of all other standards available to the reviewing body in article 8 [section 102-10] (powers and duties of various officials), article 9 [section 102-11], (administration and enforcement) and article 10 [section 102-12], (planning and zoning commission), and article 12 [section 102-13], (amendments). 
5.  No permit shall be denied on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that the telecommunications structure complies with FCC regulations concerning emissions. 
11.0  Findings. All decisions rendered by the reviewing body under a public hearing review shall be supported by substantial written evidence based upon the written record. 
12.0  Action by board of commissioners. 
12.1  Following its public hearing on the application the board of commissioners may: 
1.  Adopt the proposed amendments as presented in the application. 
2.  Adopt the proposed amendment as revised or supplemented by conditions of approval established by the board; said revisions may include, if the proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property, rezoning to the proposed zoning district with conditions or rezoning to any other less intense zoning district with or without conditions; 
3.  Deny the proposed amendment as presented in the application in whole or in part; or 
4.  Table the proposed application for more evidence until the next scheduled meeting. 
13.0  Timing of decision. 
13.1  The reviewing body shall render a decision on the review request within 45 days of the date of the public advertisement for review before the reviewing body, unless the reviewing body can demonstrate that more time is required. 
14.0  Appeals. 
14.1  If the application is denied by the community development appeals board after the final public hearing, the applicant shall appeal by certiorari to the superior court. 
14.2  If the application is denied by the county commission after the final public hearing, the applicant shall appeal as prescribed by law. 
15.0  Legal status provisions. 
15.1  Noncompliance. Noncompliance of characteristics of structures and site development created by the application shall not in any way limit the legal use of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair, maintenance, or reconstruction of a noncomplying characteristic or feature; however, in no instance shall the degree of noncompliance be increased except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
15.2  Notice. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and he will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs. The owner will notify the code enforcement department that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
15.3  Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
15.4  Interpretation. It is not the intention of this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or other agreement between parties, provided, however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use or premises for antenna array or towers than is imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
15.5  Conflict with other laws. Whenever the regulations of this chapter require less height or greater set back lines or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under the zoning ordinance or any other statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of the zoning ordinance or any other statute require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of the zoning ordinance or such statutes shall govern. 
15.6  Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, section, subsection, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the chapter if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
15.7  Repeal of conflicting resolutions. All resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict with this resolution are hereby repealed. 
9.4.  Watershed protection districts. 
1.0  Purpose. It is essential that the quality and supply of public drinking water be reasonably protected. This chapter provides for the establishment of buffer zones around streams, specifies allowable impervious surface densities within watersheds, and requires the use of best management practices for land use within the water supply districts. Natural protection such as buffer areas are best able to filter rainfall and stormwater runoff prior to that water flowing into perennial streams, which lead to water supply reservoirs. Minimizing the transport of pollutants and sediments to the water supply reservoirs guarantees a healthy yield from the water supply watersheds. This protection is necessary for the enhancement of public health, safety and welfare as well as to assure that surface sources of drinking water are of high quality and reasonably free from contaminating sources in order to be treated to meet all state and federal drinking water standards. 
2.0  Definitions. Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. The word "used " or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied." 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. Specific buffer uses may include agricultural and forestry uses as long as the uses are consistent with the criteria established by this chapter. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in sections 102-7 and 102-8. 
County means Carroll County. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watersheds means a watershed having 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a United States Geologic Survey, ("USGS"), quadrant map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Small water supply watersheds means a watershed having less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the county. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water system. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan means a land use plan prepared and adopted by local governments for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
3.0  District delineation. The protected water supply watershed overlays are hereby designated, and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake or water supply reservoir. The boundaries of these overlays are defined by the ridge lines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes. These overlays shall be further delineated and defined on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map, ("overlay map"), of the county official zoning map. The overlay map shall be identified by the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners, attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners, together with the seal of the county and the date of the resolution that the board of commissioner's recognizes the overlay map. The overlay map is also incorporated into and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
4.0  Non-conforming uses. 
4.1  Existing uses. An existing use of land existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued, as herein provided. A non-conforming tract, parcel, or lot may build, repair, and/or expand such structure without having to conform to the provisions of this chapter, so long as such improvements to the structure(s) use best management practices to manage stormwater runoff from said tract, parcel, or lot. All septic tanks, however, that are constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.2  Abandoned uses. An abandoned non-conforming use, which has been razed, damaged, destroyed or demolished through any act, may be replaced, rebuild, or reestablished after destruction or loss. However, if said non-conforming use is not reestablished for a continuous period of one year, the same shall not be re-established. Any future use after such abandonment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.0  Identification of existing and future water supply watersheds. 
5.1  Existing large water supply watersheds. 
a.  Reserved; 
b.  Dog River Watershed; 
c.  Little Tallapoosa River Structure #36, a/k/a Lake Buckhorn; 
d.  Little Tallapoosa River from the Little Tallapoosa River Structure #36 to intersection with CR 49, Salem Church Road; 
e.  Lower Little Tallapoosa River Structure #35; 
f.  Lower Little Tallapoosa River Structure #86, a/k/a Lake Tisinger; and 
g.  Turkey Creek from Lower Little Tallapoosa River Structure #86 to downstream intersection with U.S. Highway 100 (approximate distance of 1/4 mile.) 
5.2  Existing small water supply watersheds. 
a.  Sharpe Creek Watershed; 
b.  Little Tallapoosa River Structure #31; and 
c.  Little Tallapoosa River Structure #29; a/k/a Lake Paradise. 
d.  Snake Creek Reservoir, a/k/a H.C. Seaton Reservoir. 
5.3  Future water supply watersheds. None at present time. 
5.4  Withdrawals. All proposed withdrawals for public water supply must be approved by the department of natural resources. 
6.0  Exemptions. 
6.1  Existing Uses. Land uses existing at or prior to the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and land uses existing prior to any management agreements as specified in sections 102-7(7.3) and 102-8(8.3). [Note sections 102-14(14.4) and (14.5)]. 
6.2  Mining activity. Mining activity under the following conditions: 
a.  Receipt of an appropriate variance from the county board of commissioners; and 
b.  Receipt of a permit from the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act, as amended. 
6.3  Utilities. If the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas, then utilities shall be exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of water supply watershed protection plans under the following conditions: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
6.4  Forestry and agricultural. Specific forestry and agricultural activities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions of overlay districts under the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
7.0  Minimum criteria for large water supply watersheds. The stream corridors of the perennial tributaries of a large water supply watershed tributary to the water supply intake shall have the following specified minimum criteria: 
7.1  Corridors. The corridors of all perennial streams in a large water supply watershed tributary to a water supply reservoir within a seven mile radius of the reservoir boundary are protected by the following criteria: 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no more than 25 percent of the land area of any tract, parcel, or lot on which any structure or building is placed may be covered by impervious surface within a 150 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary. 
c.  Septic tank and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and the reservoir boundary. 
7.2  New facilities. New facilities located within seven miles radius upstream of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
7.3  Management agreements. The water supply reservoirs in large water supply watersheds are to be managed according to any agreements required by state law. 
8.0  Minimum criteria for small water supply watersheds. 
8.1  Stream corridor criteria. 
a.  The perennial stream corridors of a small water supply watershed within a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
(1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(3)  Septic tanks, and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks and reservoir boundary. 
b.  The perennial stream corridors within a small water supply watershed and outside a seven mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir are protected by the following criteria: 
(1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(3)  Septic tanks and septic tanks drainfields are prohibited in the setback areas of b(2) above. 
8.2  Additional criteria. The following criteria apply at all locations in a small water supply watershed. 
a.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
b.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
c.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, which ever is greater. 
d.  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
8.3  Water supply reservoir criteria. 
a.  The owner of a water supply reservoir shall develop a reservoir management plan for approval by the department of natural resources. 
b.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance shall be specified in the reservoir management plan. 
c.  Septic tanks and wastewater disposal fields are prohibited within a 150-foot setback area as measured from the reservoir boundary. 
9.0  Variance from standards. The board of commissioners shall have authority to grant an application for a variance in cases where strict adherence to setback, separation or other standards will cause an applicant special difficulties that includes one or more than the following: 
9.1  A landowner or applicant demonstrate a hardship relating to the land which is peculiar to that owner and not shared by others in the district; 
9.2  Granting the variance should not result in a detriment to the public good or the purposes under this chapter; and 
9.3  If requested by the board of commissioners, applicant shall set forth the inconsistent provisions, contrary regulations, and/or hardship upon the applicant in detail and present the same in writing to the board of commissioners. 
10.0  Administrative review procedure for variances. 
10.1  Submitting applications. All applications for variances shall first be submitted to the planning and zoning department of the county. When an application is received, the planning and zoning department shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and a time and place for a public hearing before the board of commissioners. Notice of the hearings must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before each hearing. Any person may appear at the hearing or have a representative attend instead. 
10.2  Procedure. All applications for variances shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall prepare and conduct the public hearing on the variance application in a manner similar to that set forth in section 102-13(13.6), as amended. The planning commission shall have 45 days following the date of filing within which to review the variance application and submit a recommendation to the board of commissioners. A review of an application may be extended an additional 30 days by the planning commission if just cause is shown that further time is needed to study the variance application and the board of commissioners is notified of said extension in writing. If the planning commission fails to forward its recommendations to the board of commissioners within the time period stated, the board of commissioners may assume that the planning commission has approved of the proposed application. 
11.0  Criteria for approval. Approval of a request for a variance in the overlay district shall be narrowly construed and shall be based upon the consideration and weight of one or more of the following criteria: 
11.1  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by the applicant's encroachments; 
11.2  The dangers that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
11.3  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to avoid causing disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions; 
11.4  The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the owner; 
11.5  The importance of the proposed use to the community; 
11.6  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding, for the proposed use; 
11.7  The compatibility of the proposed use with more existing and foreseeable nearby uses; 
11.8  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program in the area; 
11.9  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; or 
11.10  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site. 
12.0  Action by board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall prepare and conduct the public hearing on the variance application in a manner similar to that set forth in section 102-14(14.5), as amended. The board of commissioners shall then make an official decision on the proposed amendment. The official decision shall be made within 45 days from the date of receipt of the planning commission's recommendation. 
13.0  Appeals. If the application is denied by the board of commissioners after the final public hearing, the applicant shall appeal by certiorari to the superior court. 
14.0  Legal status provisions. 
14.1  Noncompliance. Noncompliance of characteristics of structures and site development created by the application shall not in any way limit the legal use of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair, maintenance, or reconstruction of a noncomplying characteristic or feature; however, in no instance shall the degree of noncompliance be increased except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
14.2  Notice. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and he will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs. The owner will notify the code enforcement department that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
14.3  Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
14.4  Interpretation. The overlay districts shall extend and cover other zoning districts on the official zoning map, as identified in the zoning regulations of the county, as amended. The overlay districts are not designed to replace the districts formerly occupying that space but, instead, add a new layer of controls. Each parcel of land within the overlay districts, subject to the exceptions and variances that may be granted herein, shall be subject to the provisions, regulations, and restrictions of both the overlay districts and its underlying zoning district(s). It is not, however, the intention of this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or other agreement between parties. 
14.5  Conflict with other laws. In the event of a conflict or discrepancy between the requirements of the overlay districts, the underlying zoning district(s), or any other ordinance or resolution, which has been enacted to establish measures to protect the quality of present and future water supply for the county and neighboring localities, the earliest date of enactment shall govern and determined the respective provision to be applied. 
14.6  Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, section, subsection, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the chapter if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
14.7  Repeal of conflicting resolutions. All ordinances and resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict with the resolution and ordinance from which this chapter is derived are hereby repealed, except that the repeal of a zoning ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal too effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the zoning ordinance or resolution. 
15.0.  The Snake Creek Watershed Protection District. 
15.1.  Regulations for development with the Snake Creek Watershed Protection District. 
In order that Carroll County and surrounding areas may continue to have a health economic climate, it is essential that adequate supplies of drinking water be assured. Conflicts can arise in meeting this goal when industrial, urban or suburban development occurs within area that are close to water supply reservoirs or the drainage areas supplying water to said reservoirs. Sedimentation and erosion from development reduce the storage capacity of reservoirs. Storm water runoff from developed areas can introduce pollutants into the drinking water supply, making water treatment more complicated and expensive. Effluent from nearby wastewater treatment plants can release phosphorus and other pollutants into the water supply, making water either undrinkable, expensive to treat, or unusable for recreation purposes. Certain types of industrial land uses create the risk of chemical spills occurring and contaminating the nearby reservoir before the spill can be contained. 
The purpose of the Snake Creek Watershed Protection District is to establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for Carroll County and neighboring localities. Because these protective measures allow some latitude with the land uses, and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use, but rather a range of acceptable land uses, the Snake creek Watershed Protection District is designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses that can be located within the district, there are established in this section performance standards that apply to development that occurs in that district. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to create a zoning district to be known as the Snake Creek Watershed Protection District (hereinafter referred to as the "district"), which such area has a unique environmental importance to Carroll County. 
The ordinance is intended to maintain the current high water quality of the surface water (rivers, creeks, streams and spring) and underground water of the Snake Creek Watershed Basin and to preserve and ensure that same continuing high water quality of said basin for the future. The zoning for said district is intended to provide for certain permitted uses as hereinafter provided and to protect the underground and surface water of said basin from polluting effects of uncontrolled development and from encroachments of those uses that are not compatible with a protected watershed. 
15.2.  Establishment of district. The Snake Creek Watershed Protection District shall consist of two parts 1) a water quality critical area; and 2) a limited restriction area. 
1.  A water quality critical area (hereinafter referred to he "critical area") may be established for land which lies to the shore line of the H.C. Seaton Reservoir and extends within the watershed area of the reservoir to a point beyond either the ridge line of the reservoir watershed or 1,000 feet from the shore lines of the reservoir at flood stage level (defined as height equal to top of spillway of dam) whichever is the shorted distance. 
2.  A limited restriction area (hereinafter referred to as the " limited restriction area") shall be established for the watershed area of the Reservoir and Snake Creek (primary stream serving the reservoir) and shall include the headwaters if Snake Creek and the surface waters and tributaries flowing into Snake Creek. The limited restriction area shall encompass all of these surface waters, tributaries, and creeks feeding Snake Creek and the Reservoir and an area defined as 150 feet wide on both sides of the designated streams plus an area within 150 feet of the Reservoir shore line at flood stage level (defined as height equal to top of spillway dam). 
15.3.  Definitions. 
1.  Unless otherwise noted, any "set back" measurements hereinafter stated shall be measured from the banks of any river, creek stream, spring or body of water that is located within the district or the outer property line of any property owned, operated, managed, or maintained by Carroll County Water Authority as a water source, whichever is greater. 
2.  The words "surface water" as herein used shall mean and include any river, creek, stream spring or body of water located within the district. 
3.  The words "underground water" as herein used shall mean and include any water located underground in the district. 
4.  The word " toxic" as herein used shall mean any chemical substance that has been defined as toxic by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia ( E.P.D), the Department of Agriculture of the State of Georgia (G.D.A), or the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States ( E.P.A) 
15.4.  Restrictive uses of property located within the water quality critical area. Any property lying within the water quality area shall have in addition to the restrictive uses hereinafter set out the following restrictions: 
1.  Permitted residential uses. 
A.  Minimum lot size. 
1.  One acre, if served by public sewer. 
2.  Residential lots, all or a portion of which lie within 400 feet of the reservoir, served by septic tank and nitrification filed, shall be a minimum of two acres in size. All other residential lots lying within the critical area, outside the 400-foot line, shall be a minimum of one acre in size. 
15.5.  Minimum set back lines from building or structure. On any property adjacent or contiguous to a water-source reservoir or stream the minimum set back line for the construction of a residential building or structure shall be established as follows: 
1.  The building set back line shall be a minimum of 100 feet from the high-water flood line. 
2.  Minimum set back lines for nitrification field line: 250 feet from high water flood line. 
3.  Permitted agricultural uses. 
I.  Minimum set back lines for building or structure: same as residential construction. 
II.  Minimum set back lines for nitrification field line: same as for residential. 
III.  Minimum set back lines for cultivation: 50 feet from high water flood line. 
4.  Commercial: No commercial structures or uses of any nature. 
5.  Industrial: No industrial structures or uses of any nature. 
15.6.  Permitted uses. The following uses of property located within the critical area are permitted provided they meet the requirements stated in this ordinance; and 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Row crops and pasture. 
3.  Family and commercial agriculture. 
4.  Non-commercial agriculture, poultry, dairying, horse and livestock raising and greenhouses, as an accessory use to a permitted residential dwelling for the principal benefit of the occupants thereof. 
5.  Riding stables and academics. 
6.  Sale of products and commodities grown solely on the premises. 
7.  Schools, colleges, and publicly owned and operated community structures. 
8.  Public utility structures, building and land. 
9.  Accessory uses and buildings. 
10.  Public parks, playgrounds, community buildings, golf courses and similar public service facilities. 
11.  Privately owned day nurseries, pre-school, and kindergartens. 
12.  Churches, similar places of worship, and non-commercial cemeteries. 
13.  Clubs, private and public, including golf and country clubs, fishing and hunting clubs and other similar enterprises. 
14.  Home occupations. 
15.  Lakes and impoundments built to soil conversation service specifications. 
15.7.  Restrictions and limitations in the limited restriction area. The following restrictions and limitations shall apply to property, all or a portion of which, adjoins or lies within 150 feet of the reservoir flood stage level within or 150 feet of any designated stream within the limited restriction area of the district. 
1.  Permitted residential use: 
A.  Single-family dwelling-minimum lot size: 3/4 acre if served by public sewerage 1 1/4, if served by septic tank and nitrification field. 
B.  Multi-family dwellings, which are served by public sewerage. 
C.  Minimum set back lines from water source or flood way for building or structure for single-family and multi-family dwellings: 150 feet. 
D.  Minimum set back nitrification field and dwellings: 150 feet 
2.  Permitted agricultural use: Lines for septic tank and line for single-family 
A.  Minimum set back lines for septic tanks and nitrification field: 150 feet 
B.  Minimum set back lines for residential structures: 150 feet 
C.  Minimum set back lines for barns and other accessory buildings: 150 feet 
D.  Minimum Set Back lines for cultivation: 100 feet 
3.  Permitted commercial use: 
A.  Minimum lot size: Two acres. 
B.  Minimum set back lines for structure, nitrification field, accessory building or parking lot: 150 feet. 
4.  Permitted industrial use: 
A.  Minimum lot size: Five acres 
B.  Minimum set back lines for structure, accessory building or parking lot: 150 feet. 
C.  Minimum Set Back lines for septic tank and nitrification field line: 150 feet. 
15.8.  Prohibited uses. The following activities shall not be permitted within the district. 
1.  No sewage treatment facility shall be constructed in the district unless Carroll County Water Autrhoriy and E.P.D grant prior approval. 
2.  No commercial or industrial business, which uses, sells, stores, or maintains any toxic chemicals, toxic waste or toxic wastes or toxic products. 
3.  No agricultural or industrial business which uses, sell, stores, or maintains any toxic chemicals, toxic waste or toxic products 
4.  No agricultural activity that does not strictly comply with Georgia pesticides Act of 1976, Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act of 1976, and Georgia Laws 1982, House bill 1780 (O.C.G.A. § 2-1-4) and (O.C.G.A. § 2-7-90 et. .Seq). 
5.  No industry, business or facility, which uses, makes or creates as a product or by product any toxic wastes, heavy material, grease, or animal fat. 
6.  No dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products onto the land into the atmosphere or in a stream or body of water located in the area above described. 
7.  No landfills or waste disposal facilities of any kind (except for approval septic tanks). 
8.  No underground fuel or chemical storage tanks are allowed. For purposes of this section underground refers to the burial of such tanks below the surface of the ground or the covering of then by a bream built above grade. Spill containments measures (i.e. dikes, doublelined tanks, etc.) Must be taken for any aboveground fuel or chemical storage tank. 
15.9.  Restriction on land below dam site. The following additional restrictions shall apply to land lying in the district that is located behind and below any existing water reservoir, dam or any planned water reservoir or dam. 
1.  No building or accessory buildings shall be constructed any lower than the maximum flood elevation for a distance of one mile downstream from the dam of the reservoir. 
15.10.  Impervious surface limitations. In order to prevent an excessive amount of storm-water runoff from damaging the water quality of the reservoir, it is necessary to encourage as much infiltration as possible of runoff from hard surfaces onto land area, which can absorb and filter runoff. For the purposes of this section, an impervious surface us defined as a surface composed of any material that impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil impervious surfaces may include, but are not limited to: roofs, streets, parking area, tennis courts, driveways, patios, sidewalks, and any concrete, asphalt or compacted gravel surface. Impervious surface calculations for an individual development shall be cumulative for original construction or any subsequent additions, which are made. The following impervious surface limits shall be applied to the district as specified below. 
1.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within 150 feet setback from reservoir flood stage level or within a 150 feet setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  There shall be limitation of no more than 25 percent of the land area or the existing use, whichever is greater of that portion of a single development located within the boundaries of the limited restriction area, which may be covered by an impervious surface. Roof areas of residential buildings not in excess of roof runoff is kept from directly or indirectly entering the street or parking/driveway drainage systems, but is directed rather onto lawn or natural vegetation area within the confides of the particular lot or development in which the roof is located. 
15.11.  Special runoff and drainage requirements. It is necessary to impose several requirements on development in the district in order to prevent damage to water quality that is not necessarily attributed to an individual property within a development. These requirements are as specified below: 
1.  Stormwater runoff retention. For development within the district, measure shall be employed to infiltrate, retain or detain (detention being least preferred) stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces. Methods to accomplish that infiltration, retention or detention shall be shown on the development site plan. The area to which this requirement shall apply may be for each individual lot within a single development, or the development as a whole. If the developer elects to satisfy this requirement for the development as a whole, the site plan shall indicate how many devices or structures used to accomplish retention, infiltration or detention shall be maintained. The developer will not be required to employ measures to retain or detain runoff from driveways walkways or patios located on private residential lots as long as the runoff from said surfaces is controlled to allow infiltration of the same into surrounding lawn or ground cover. 
2.  Buffer zones around reservoir and along streams. A 100-foot wide buffer zone shall be maintained in all banks surrounding the Reservoir. Said buffer zone shall start at the high water flood level of the Reservoir and extend outward. A 100-foot wide buffer zone shall be maintained on both sides of all perennial streams within the limited restriction area. Said buffer zone shall begin at the top of the adjoining banks on the streams. 
Briars and dead brush in the buffer zones may be removed by the land owner. Ground within this buffer zone may be only minimally distributed; it may be bush hogged, but it may not be plowed or harrowed or otherwise distributed. Flowering shrubs and trees may be planted in the buffer, and grasses may be sown, however no pesticides, herbicides or other weed killer compounds may be used in this area. Animals shall be permitted to graze in the buffer, but excessive grazing which results in all vegetation being stripped from the buffer zone will not be allowed. Timber may be harvested in a controlled method, with trees to be cut to fall away from the stream. Stumps may be individually removed if the hole is filled and steps are taken to prevent erosion. 
3.  Street runoff and drainage. New streets constructed within the district shall not require curb and gutter unless otherwise required by subdivision ordinances. New streets, which cross perennial stream within the district, shall be designed to limit direct runoff from pavement surfaces into the stream it crosses. Such design features shall be indicated on the site plan submitted by a developer. 
Street, crossing, utility lines, recreational and green way facilities and recreation related paved surfaces may be allowed as exceptions to vegetative buffer requirement in buffer area, flood ways and flood way fringe areas. However, such intrusion shall be minimized or mitigate to the extent possible. 
15.12.  Pre-existing conditions. All parcels of land within the district at the time of the passage of this ordinance [from which this section derived] that do not conform or come within the permitted uses or the minimum standards hereinafter set out shall be governed by the Zoning Regulations of Carroll County, Georgia, as amended, as it relates to nonconforming uses and activities. 
15.13.  Zoning and building permits. The following additional requirement must be met prior to obtaining rezoning or building permits within the district 
1.  Should the owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land, lying within 150 feet of any surface water in the Limited Area of the district purpose to develop any portion of the property, the owner or his authorized agent shall submit a topographical survey or drawing to scale showing the exact location of the surface water and its relationship to the property to be developed. 
15.14.  Variances. Variances may be made by the governing authority of Carroll County or by any municipal governing authority located in the district as to lot sizes, uses and activities, provided that sewage generated by the facility located on said property is serviced by an approved public agricultural or industrial facilities which uses, makes or creates as a product or byproduct any toxic substance wastes. 
16.0  Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District. 
16.1.  Regulations for development with the Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District. 
In order that Carroll County and surrounding areas may continue to have a health economic climate, it is essential that adequate supplies of drinking water be assured. Conflicts can arise in meeting this goal when industrial, urban or suburban development occurs within area that are close to water supply reservoirs or the drainage areas supplying water to said reservoirs. Sedimentation and erosion from development reduce the storage capacity of reservoirs. Storm water runoff from developed areas can introduce pollutants into the drinking water supply, making water treatment more complicated and expensive. Effluent from nearby wastewater treatment plants can release phosphorus and other pollutants into the water supply, making water either undrinkable, expensive to treat, or unusable for recreation purposes. Certain types of industrial land uses create the risk of chemical spills occurring and contaminating the nearby reservoir before the spill can be contained. 
The purpose of the Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District is to establish measures to protect the quality of the present and future water supply for Carroll County and neighboring localities. Because these protective measures allow some latitude with the land uses, and because the district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use, but rather a range of acceptable land uses, the Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District is designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses that can be located within the district, there are established in this section performance standards that apply to development that occurs in that district. 
The purpose of this ordinance [from which this section derived] is to create a zoning district to be known as the Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District (hereinafter referred to as the "District"), which such area has a unique environmental importance to Carroll County. 
The ordinance is intended to maintain the current high water quality of the surface water (rivers, creeks, streams and spring) and underground water of the Sharpe Creek Watershed Basin and to preserve and ensure that same continuing high water quality of said basin for the future. The zoning for said district is intended to provide for certain permitted uses as hereinafter provided and to protect the underground and surface water of said basin from polluting effects of uncontrolled development and from encroachments of those uses that are not compatible with a protected watershed. 
16.2.  Establishment of district. The Sharpe Creek Watershed Protection District shall consist [of] a limited restriction area. 
A limited restriction area (hereinafter referred to as the " limited restriction area") shall be established for the watershed area of the Reservoir and Sharpe Creek (primary stream serving the reservoir) and shall include the headwaters of Sharpe Creek and the surface waters and tributaries flowing into Sharpe Creek. The limited restriction area shall encompass all of these surface waters, tributaries, and creeks feeding Sharpe Creek and the Reservoir and an area defined as 150 feet wide on both sides of the designated streams plus an area within 150 feet of the reservoir shore line at flood stage level (defined as height equal to top of spillway dam). 
16.3.  Definitions. 
1.  Unless otherwise noted, any "set back" measurements hereinafter stated shall be measured from the banks of any river, creek stream, spring or body of water that is located within the district 
2.  The words "surface water" as herein used shall mean and include any river, creek, stream spring or body of water located within the district. 
3.  The words "underground water" as herein used shall mean and include any water located underground in the district. 
4.  The word "toxic" as herein used shall mean any chemical substance that has been defined as toxic by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia (E.P.D), the Department of Agriculture of the State of Georgia (G.D.A), or the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States (E.P.A). 
16.4.  Restrictions and limitations in the limited restriction area. The following restrictions and limitations shall apply to property, all or a portion of which, adjoins or lies within 150 feet of the reservoir flood stage level or within 150 feet of any designated stream within the limited restriction area of the district. 
1.  Permitted residential use: 
A.  Single family dwelling-minimum lot size: 3/4 acre if served by public sewerage. 1 ¼ acres, if served by septic tank and nitrification field. 
B.  Multi-family dwellings, which are served by public sewerage. 
C.  Minimum set back lines from water source or flood way for building or structure for single-family and multi-family dwellings: 150 feet. 
D.  Minimum set back nitrification field and dwellings: 150 feet 
2.  Permitted agricultural use: Lines for septic tank and line for single-family. 
D.  Minimum set back lines for septic tanks and nitrification field: 150 feet 
E.  Minimum set back lines for residential structures: 150 feet 
F.  Minimum set back lines for barns and other accessory buildings: 150 feet 
G.  Minimum set back lines for cultivation: 100 feet 
3.  Permitted commercial use: 
H.  Minimum lot size: Two acres. 
I.  Minimum set back lines for structure, nitrification field, accessory building or parking lot: 150 feet. 
4.  Permitted industrial use: 
J.  Minimum lot size: Five acres. 
K.  Minimum set back lines for structure, accessory building or parking lot: 150 feet. 
L.  Minimum set back lines for septic tank and nitrification field lines: 150 feet. 
5.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leach ate collection systems. 
6.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
7.  New facilities located within the district, which handle hazardous material of the types and amounts determined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
16.5.  Restrictions on land below dam site. The following additional restrictions shall apply to land lying in the district that is located behind and below any existing water reservoir, dam, or any planned water reservoir or dam. 
1.  No building or accessory buildings shall be constructed any lower than the maximum flood elevation for a distance of one mile downstream from the dam of the reservoir. 
16.6.  Impervious surface limitations. In order to prevent an excessive amount of storm-water runoff from damaging the water quality of the reservoir, it is necessary to encourage as much infiltration as possible of runoff from hard surfaces onto land area, which can absorb and filter runoff. For the purposes of this section, an impervious surface us defined as a surface composed of any material that impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil impervious surfaces may include, but are not limited to: roofs, streets, parking area, tennis courts, driveways, patios, sidewalks, and any concrete, asphalt or compacted gravel surface. Impervious surface calculations for an individual development shall be cumulative for original construction or any subsequent additions, which are made. The following impervious surface limits shall be applied to the district as specified below. 
1.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within 150 feet setback from reservoir flood stage level or within a 150 feet setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  There shall be limitation of no more than 25 percent of the land area or the existing use, whichever is greater of that portion of a single development located within the boundaries of the limited restriction area, which may be covered by an impervious surface. Roof areas of residential buildings not in excess of roof runoff is kept from directly or indirectly entering the street or parking/driveway drainage systems, but is directed rather onto lawn or natural vegetation area within the confides of the particular lot or development in which the roof is located. 
16.7.  Special runoff and drainage requirements. It is necessary to impose several requirements on development in the district in order to prevent damage to water quality that is not necessarily attributed to an individual property within a development. These requirements are as specified below: 
1.  Stormwater runoff retention. For development within the district, measure shall be employed to infiltrate, retain or detain (detention being least preferred) stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces. Methods to accomplish that infiltration, retention or detention shall be shown on the development site plan. The area to which this requirement shall apply may be for each individual lot within a single development, or the development as a whole. If the developer elects to satisfy this requirement for the development as a whole, the site plan shall indicate how many devices or structures used to accomplish retention, infiltration or detention shall be maintained. The developer will not be required to employ measures to retain or detain runoff from driveways walkways or patios located on private residential lots as long as the runoff from said surfaces is controlled to allow infiltration of the same into surrounding lawn or ground cover. 
2.  Buffer zones around reservoir and along streams. A 100-foot wide buffer zone shall be maintained in all banks surrounding the Reservoir. Said buffer zone shall start at the high water flood level of the Reservoir and extend outward. A 100-foot wide buffer zone shall be maintained on both sides of all perennial streams within the limited restriction area. Said buffer zone shall begin at the top of the adjoining banks on the streams. 
i.  Briars and dead brush in the buffer zones may be removed by the land owner. Ground within this buffer zone may be only minimally distributed; it may be bush hogged, but it may not be plowed or harrowed or otherwise distributed. Flowering shrubs and trees may be planted in the buffer, and grasses may be sown, however no pesticides, herbicides or other weed killer compounds may be used in this area. Animals shall be permitted to graze in the buffer, but excessive grazing which results in all vegetation being stripped from the buffer zone will not be allowed. Timber may be harvested in a controlled method, with trees to be cut to fall away from the stream. Stumps may be individually removed if the hole is filled and steps are taken to prevent erosion. 
3.  Street runoff and drainage. New streets constructed within the district shall not require curb and gutter unless otherwise required by subdivision ordinances. New streets, which cross perennial stream within the district, shall be designed to limit direct runoff from pavement surfaces into the stream it crosses. Such design features shall be indicated on the site plan submitted by a developer. 
i.  Street, crossing, utility lines, recreational and green way facilities and recreation related paved surfaces may be allowed as exceptions to vegetative buffer requirement in buffer area, flood ways and flood way fringe areas. However, such intrusion shall be minimized or mitigate to the extent possible. 
16.8.  Pre-existing conditions. All parcels of land within the district at the time of the passage of this ordinance that do not conform or come within the permitted uses or the minimum standards hereinafter set out shall be governed by the Zoning Regulations of Carroll County, Georgia, as amended, as it relates to nonconforming uses and activities. 
16.9.  Zoning and building permits. The following additional requirement must be met prior to obtaining rezoning or building permits within the district. 
1.  Should the owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land, lying within 150 feet of any surface water in the Limited Area of the district purpose to develop any portion of the property, the owner or his authorized agent shall submit a topographical survey or drawing to scale showing the exact location of the surface water and its relationship to the property to be developed. 
16.10.  Variances. Variances may be made by the governing authority of Carroll County or by any municipal governing authority located in the district as to lot sizes, uses and activities, provided that sewage generated by the facility located on said property is serviced by an approved public agricultural or industrial facilities which uses, makes or creates as a product or byproduct any toxic substance wastes. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 9.0; Ord. of 7-14-98(6); Ord. of 3-1-16(1); Ord. of 10-13-98(1); Res. of 4-11-00(1); Ord. of 10-19-04(1), § 1) 
Sec. 102-10. - Powers and duties of various officials concerning this chapter. 
10.1.  Powers and duties of the county codes enforcement officer. The codes enforcement officer has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
1.  Determine in which zoning district a parcel of land lies. 
2.  Issue building or zoning compliance permits under the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Offer practical suggestions on how to comply with this chapter. 
5.  Maintain complete records concerning this chapter and related matters, and make such records available to the public upon request. 
10.2.  Powers and duties of the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter. 
1.  Advise the governing authority on applications for amendment to this chapter by examining amendment applications and providing written recommendations to the governing authority. 
2.  Propose and/or review amendments to this chapter and to the zoning map. 
3.  Conduct public hearings prior to adoption of amendments to this chapter and to the zoning map. 
4.  Maintain and update the county future land use plan so that it may provide a current data base with which decisions on proposed amendments to this chapter may be made that utilize sound planning principles. 
5.  Carry out an ongoing comprehensive planning program. 
10.3.  Reserved. 
10.4.  Powers and duties of the governing authority. The governing authority of the county shall have the dower and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
1.  Accept applications for amendment of this chapter and render official decisions on the applications after referring the same to the planning commission for review and recommendation as specified in this chapter. 
2.  Propose amendments to this chapter. 
3.  Authorize conditional uses according to the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 10.0; Res. of 10-13-98(2); Res. of 4-11-00(1); Ord. of 12-18-01(1)) 
Sec. 102-11. - Administration and enforcement. 
11.1.  Enforcing officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the codes enforcement officer of the county. His duties shall include the administration of inspecting premises and issuing building permits. The county planner or his/her designee shall issue zoning compliance certificates for uses and buildings that meet the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the county. 
(1)  At any time a person applies for a building permit in the county or intends to change the use of a parcel of land located in the county, he shall obtain a certificate of zoning compliance issued by the county planner or his/her designee certifying that the proposed structure, land use or alteration complies with the provisions of this chapter. The certificate of zoning compliance will be noted on the building permit. 
(2)  Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by such information as may be required by the county planner or his/her designee to determine whether the proposed structure, land use or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter: 
Site plans presenting an accurate record of existing conditions and proposed uses including property lines, rights-of-way, and structures may be required. 
(3)  If any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved, converted, or maintained or any building or lot or parcel of land is used in violation of this chapter or without obtaining the required certificate of zoning compliance, the codes enforcement officer, or any other appropriate county authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate actions in proceeding to prevent said violation in the case of each such building or use. 
Furthermore, any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each violation according to law. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 11.0) 
Sec. 102-12. - Planning commission. 
12.1.  Creation. There is created a planning commission. 
12.2.  Membership; term of office; compensation of members; vacancies. The planning commission shall be composed of seven members. Each member of the board of commissioners shall be entitled to appoint one member to the planning commission for a term of four years; however, initial appointment of the members shall be in accordance with the resolution adopting this section. Any vacancy in the membership of the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. The expiration of each district term shall be set forth herein and each new member shall be as follows: District (1) shall expire on 05/31/01, District (2) shall expire on 05/31/03, District (3) shall expire on 05/31/01, District (4) shall expire on 05/31/03, District (5) shall expire on 05/31/01, District (6) shall expire on 05/31/03, and the at-large member shall expire on 05/31/00. Future successors shall be appointed upon the expiration of the term for a term of four years. Any vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointments. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the planning commission. The members appointed shall be residents and citizens of the county. Any three members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. 
12.3.  Officers; meetings; staff, finances. The county planning commission shall elect one of its appointive members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairman, and he shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the board of commissioners or of the planning commission. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the actions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. If any amounts are appropriated by the board of commissioners for the planning commission, the planning commission may cooperate with or accept funds from federal, state or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, and with consent of the board of commissioners may expend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and other contracts as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. 
12.4.  Preparation of development regulations. It shall be the obligation of the county planning commission to oversee comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and use their best efforts to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote public health, safety, morals, convenience, property or general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy, in the development of the county. In particular, the planning commission should: 
(a)  Oversee the preparation of a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the county. 
(b)  Oversee the preparation and recommend for adoption to the board of commissioners a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the county. 
(c)  Oversee the preparation and recommend for adoption to the board of commissioners regulations for the subdivision of land within the county, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
(d)  Oversee the preparation and recommend for adoption to the board of commissioners a plat or an official map showing the location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the county or a specified portion thereof. 
12.5.  Additional responsibilities. The planning commission may make, publish and distribute maps, plans and reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the county to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the county programs for public improvements and financing thereof. All public officials should, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, and its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys; provided, however, that the planning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to property, resulting therefrom. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of the county. 
12.6.  Preparation of master plan. It should be the duty of the county planning commission to oversee the preparation of a master plan of the county and to perfect it from time to time. Such master plan may show, among other things, existing and proposed streets, highways, expressways, bridges, and viaducts and approaches thereto; routes of railroads and transit lines; terminals, ports and airports; parks, playgrounds, forests, reservations and other public open spaces; sites for public buildings and structures; districts for residence, business, industry, recreation, agriculture or forestry; special districts for other purposes; limited development districts for purposes of conservation, water supply, sanitation, drainage, renewal and redevelopment; location of public utilities, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, sewerage and water supply systems; zoning districts and other planning features, together with time and priority schedules and cost estimates for the accomplishment of the proposals. The master plan should be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. Such plan may be adopted, added to and changed, from time to time, by a vote of the planning commission. It shall be a public record, but its purpose and effect shall be solely to aid the planning commission in the performance of its duties." 
12.7.  Rules of procedure. The following procedure shall govern the conduct of business before the planning commission. 
(a)  All hearings before the county planning commission shall be shall be open to the public. Visual and sound recordings shall be permitted. 
(b)  Regularly scheduled meetings of the planning commission at such other times as the members of the planning commission may determine. All special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings of the planning commission shall be called either by the zoning administrator, county planner or their respective designee, the chairman of the planning commission, or a quorum of the members of the planning commission. For purposes of this subsection, a quorum shall be defined as three members of the planning commission present and voting. 
(c)  The planning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of county planner and shall be a public record. Nothing in this policy or procedure, however, shall require the planning commission to record or transcribe all testimony before it. 
(d)  Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a meeting of the planning commission and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for the individual members of the board. All comments by any speaker shall be directed to the planning commission and may not be directed to any other person in the audience. The chairperson shall have the right to call any speaker out of order for making irrelevant comments or personal attacks upon any person. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(e)  In all proceedings before the planning commission, the commission shall follow the following format for conducting zoning inquires: 
(1)  The chairman shall call for an item to be placed before the planning commission from the county planner or his/her designee. 
(2)  The zoning applicant may make a presentation to the Commission. 
(3)  The planning commission shall seek comments from all persons desiring to speak in favor of the proposed application for rezoning. 
(4)  The planning commission shall solicit comments from all parsons opposed to the application for rezoning. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  The planning commission shall ask questions of any speakers and/or the county staff to be deemed appropriate. 
(8)  The planning commission shall conduct any appropriate discussion of the issues presented. 
(9)  The planning commission shall take action upon the rezoning application and record the results of any votes upon the minutes of the planning commission. 
(10)  For the purpose of calling and conducting meetings, for taking votes on any matters pending before the planning and zoning commission, and for any other action deemed necessary and appropriate and authorized by the planning and zoning ordinance, a quorum shall for all purposes expressed herein consist of three members of the planning and zoning commission present and voting. 
(f)  In his/her discretion, the chairman shall at any time have the right to establish time limitations if needed due to excessively lengthy presentations or the length of the agenda. All comments by any speaker shall be directed to the planning commission and may not be directed to any other person in the audience. The chairman shall have the right to call any speaker out of order for making irrelevant comments or personal attacks upon any person. 
12.8.  Grounds for removal. For the purpose of this section, any one or more of the following shall constitute a reason for removing a planning commission member "for cause." 
(a)  Participating as a planning commissioner at any regular or called meeting of the planning commission under the influence of intoxicants, alcohol, or unprescribed or illegal drugs or using, possessing or for selling the same. 
(b)  Charge and accusation for a misdemeanor which would adversely affect performance of duties as planning commissioner. 
(c)  Conduct unbecoming a planning commissioner, including, but not limited to, demeaning conduct or use of profanity or vulgar language during any open public meeting of the planning commission. 
(d)  Indictment of a felony. 
(e)  Unauthorized use of county property, county telephones or other county communication equipment. 
(f)  Filing false expense reports. 
(g)  Two absences from planning commission meetings within a six-month period. 
(Res. of 2-8-00(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-16-01(1), § 1; Res. of 6-17-08(1)) 
12.9.  Conditional uses. 
1.  Procedure—Contents. Prior to processing of any application for a conditional use permit, the applicant, (herein defined as a person or entity other than a local government), shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth in this section. The applicant shall be required to file an application with the office of community development containing the following: 
a.  An appropriate number of copies of a completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development. 
b.  The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. In addition, persons having a security interest in the subject property must consent to the application. 
c.  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of community development. 
d.  The applicant shall submit a current boundary survey and plat plan, to scale, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer. In the alternative, the applicant may present other similar drawing, sketch, or plans that properly identifies the boundaries and planned development. Such development plan may also include such other information thereon as may be required by the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee, including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines, buffer areas, any future right-of-way, wet areas, flood plains, utilities and stormwater retention. 
e.  The applicant shall submit any other information required by the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee or other county departments which they deem necessary or desirable in processing the application, which is related to the present or proposed use of the property. 
2.  Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing for review of the application. 
3.  All applications for conditional use permits before the planning and zoning commission and board of commissioners shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. 
4.  A recommendation concerning the application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the board of commissioners by the planning and zoning commission. 
5.  The board of commissioners may grant conditional use permits for the uses enumerated in the designated districts. 
6.  The board of commissioners may grant conditional use permits for any period of time in the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
7.  In addition to general district, the board of commissioners shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a conditional use permit: 
a.  Whether, or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located. 
b.  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the neighborhood. 
c.  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under state law. 
d.  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
e.  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
f.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
g.  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
h.  Whether or not special or unique conditions overcome the board of commissioners' general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow noncompatible business uses. 
i.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
j.  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries. 
k.  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition. 
l.  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
m.  Whether the applicant can vary from any minimum required lot size requirement. 
8.  The governing authority shall make a decision with respect to the application and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. The governing authority shall include any condition, requirement or limitation which may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Further appeal on certiorari may be made to the county superior court. 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-8-00(1), § 1, repealed and replaced § 102-12 in its entirety. Former § 102-12 pertained to "Planning and zoning commission," and was derived from Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 12.0. 
Sec. 102-13. - Community development appeals board. 
There is hereby created a Community Development Appeals Board of Carroll County, Georgia. 
13.0  Community development appeals board. 
13.1 Creation. There is created a community development appeals board. 
13.2. Membership; term of office; compensation of members; membership and appointment The community development appeals board shall be composed of seven members. Each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint one member to the board. Each member appointed by a member of the board of commissioners shall serve concurrently with the appointing commissioner's term of office and until a successor is appointed. The expiration of each district term shall be set forth herein and each new member shall be appointed as follows: district (1) shall expire on 05/31/05, district (2) shall expire on 05/31/03, district (3) shall expire on 05/31/05, district (4) shall expire on 05/31/03, district (5) shall expire on 05/31/05, district (6) shall expire on 05/31/03, and the at-large member shall expire on 05/31/05. Members may be reappointed. Future successors shall be appointed upon the expiration of the term for a term of four years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. The board of commissioners shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the community development appeals board. 
13.3. Officers. The community development appeals board shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until reelected or a successor is elected. The community development appeals board shall appoint a vice chairperson. 
13.4 Duties and responsibilities. The community development appeals board shall be authorized with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(a)  Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where expressly authorized by the ordinances of the county, and unless another appeal process is specified, appeals from any decision made by any administrative officer of the community development department of the county. 
(b)  Area variances. Hear and decide area variances in specific cases from restrictions on the construction or placement of buildings and other structures and allow for adjustments to the requirements for yards, height, frontage, setbacks, and similar dimensional aspects, provided, however, that no request for a variance shall be permitted in a zoning district where its use is not expressly authorized by the zoning ordinance. The community development appeals board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made: 
(1)  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property. 
(2)  That denying the variance would impose an unnecessary hardship due to such conditions. 
(3)  That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or locality in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent properties, nor be detrimental to the public welfare. 
(4)  That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue. 
(c)  Special exceptions. Hear and decide requests for special exceptions upon which the community development appeals board is required to consider. 
13.5 Grounds for removal. For the purpose of this section, the board of commissioners may remove any member for any one or more of the following reasons, which shall constitute a reason "for cause." 
(a)  Participating at any community development appeals board regular or called meeting of the community development appeals board under the influence of intoxicants, alcohol, or unprescribed or illegal drugs or using, possessing or for selling the same. 
(b)  Conduct unbecoming a member of the community development appeals board, including, but not limited to, demeaning conduct or use of profanity or vulgar language during any open public meeting of the community development appeals board. 
(c)  Indictment of a felony. 
(d)  Unauthorized use of county property, county telephones or other county communication equipment. 
(e)  Filing false expense reports. 
(f)  Three absences from community development appeals board meetings within a six month period. 
(h)[(g)]  No member of the community development appeals board shall hold or qualify to hold any elected office or position in the county or in any city having its incorporated limits within the county. 
13.6 Administrative variances. 
(a)  In the opinion of the director of community development, after consultation with the chairperson of the community development appeals board, shall have the authority to grant minor variances from the development standards of the zoning ordinance where the uniqueness of the land, its topographical characteristics, and other relevant evidence and considerations would demonstrate compliance with the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance. A report of each minor variance granted shall be made to the community development appeals board at the next hearing. 
(b)  The request for a variance to the director shall be in writing, stating the variance being sought, and the reasons why the request should be granted. Within 45 days of receipt of the request for a variance, the director shall make a decision to all interested parties with reasons supporting the decision. If the director executes an action which the applicant or other injured party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the community development appeals board. 
13.7 Meetings; rules of procedure; effect of appeal. 
(a)  Meetings. The community development appeals board shall adopt rules of procedures consistent with this section. Meetings of the community development appeals board shall be at the call of the zoning administrator, chairperson, and at such other times as the members of the community development appeals board may determine. The chairperson or, in his absence, the vice-chairperson, or zoning administrator may administer oaths. The community development appeals board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The community development appeals board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the zoning administrator for the community development appeals board and shall be a public record. 
(b)  Rules of procedure. Unless another appeal process is specified, appeals to the community development appeals board may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any decision made by any administrative officer of the community development department of the county. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the community development appeals board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the community development appeals board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the community development appeals board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  Effect of appeal. An appeal stays all administrative proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the community development appeals board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case administrative proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the community development appeals board or by an appropriate court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
13.8 Applications for appeal, variance, and special exception. 
(a)  Appeals. All applications for appeal shall be in writing, stating the specific appeal being sought, accompanied by the applicable fee, and state the reasons why the request should be granted. An appropriate number of copies of the appeal shall be filed with the planning and zoning administrator, and if applicable the administrative officer whose decision is alleged to be in error. If applicable, the appeal shall be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development. The application for appeal shall be certified by the property owner or other applicable party that all the information is true and correct and the application for appeal may be void if any material information is untrue. The community development appeals board may grant, modify, or deny the appeal. 
(b)  Variance. Each application shall be in writing and on such forms as may be developed for such purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by a site plan, with North point, scale, land district, land lot, and containing appropriate information required by the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. In addition, persons having a security interest in the subject property must consent to the application; 
(2)  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of community development; 
(3)  Identification of the owner of the subject property; 
(4)  Identification of any agent of the owner of the subject property; 
(5)  A legal description of the subject property, or alternatively a description that provides an adequate description to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning administrator; 
(6)  A complete description and inventory of all existing structures on the subject property; whether any uses or structures are non-conforming; 
(7)  A complete description and inventory of all proposed structures proposed or to be located on the subject property under this chapter and for which the variance is being requested; 
(8)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities presently occurring; 
(9)  A complete description and inventory of any and all activities proposed to occur on the subject property and for which the variance is being requested; and 
(10)  Certification of the agent or property owner that all the information is true and correct, acknowledgment that such information is relied upon by the county, and the application for variance shall be void if any material information is untrue. 
(c)  Special exceptions. An applicant may apply for a special exception permit to construct a single family dwelling from an intrafamily transfer of land, which is zoned agricultural and contains less than four acres but one acre or more. For purposes of this section, an intrafamily transfer occurs between immediate family members. The immediate family is a group of individuals consisting of a father, mother, and children by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship. The immediate family does not include an extended family. 
(1)  Procedure—Contents. Prior to processing of any application for a special exception permit, the applicant shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth herein. The applicant shall be required to file a complete application with the community development department containing the following: 
(A)  An appropriate number of copies of a completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the community development department. 
(B)  The notarized signatures of the applicant and 100 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. In addition, persons having a security interest in the subject property must consent to the application. 
(C)  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the community development department. 
(D)  The applicant shall submit a current boundary survey and plat plan, to scale, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer. In the alternative, the applicant may present other similar drawing, sketch, or plans that properly identifies the boundaries and proposed location of the single family residence. Such development plan shall include such other information as may be required by the zoning administrator, or a respective designee, including but not limited to preliminary plans for development, building location, access points, adjacent streets, lot lines, wet areas, and flood plains. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for a special exception permit the community development appeal board shall hold a public hearing for review of the application. The community development appeals board shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a special exception permit: 
(A)  Whether, or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed single family dwelling will be located. 
(B)  Whether or not the proposed single family dwelling is otherwise compatible with the neighborhood. 
(C)  Whether or not the public health, safety, or welfare concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
(D)  Whether a denial would impose an unnecessary hardship upon the applicant and the immediate family. 
(E)  The applicant's justification for not choosing to apply for a conditional use or zoning change, 
(3)  The community development appeals board will consider each application, and upon determining whether the applicant has satisfied requirements for such a special exception permit, shall issue the special exception permit. 
(4)  Special conditions. The community development appeals board may attach conditions and limitations to any special exception permit issued and may require the written certification of the applicant that he/she understands and will abide by those conditions if issued the special exception permit. 
(5)  Upon being granted a special exception permit, the applicant must then apply to the community development department for a building permit. The applicant must comply with all rules and regulations as set forth in the subdivision regulations. 
13.9 Public hearings. The community development appeals board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by counsel. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an appeal from a decision of the administrative officer or building official where appeal is not directed to another decision making body, an application for a variance, or application for an appeal, the community development appeals board shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall give notice thereof, all as provided by law, by: 
(1)  Publication thereof in the official organ of the county at least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing date before the community development appeals board; 
(2)  Posting a notice, as provided by law, not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing, in a conspicuous place or places on the property affected, and each such notice or sign shall contain information that a variance is requested, contact information, and the date and time of the hearing before the community development appeals board; and 
(3)  Notification by regular U.S. mail of adjoining property owners and others affected property owners, if applicable, that shall contain information that a variance is requested, contact information, and the date and time of the hearing before the community development appeals board. 
(b)  Any public hearing before the community development appeals board may be electronically recorded or transcribed by a stenographer or court reporter, as the community development appeals board may from time to time authorize and direct; and video or sound recording or other transcription of any such hearing may be made. 
(c)  An interested party may present evidence by affidavits, letters, reports, live testimony, photographs, videos, or any other medium generally accepted by the courts of this state. An interested party shall have the right to cross-examine any witness testifying for another party. All evidence shall be material and relevant to the issue before the community development appeals board; the community development appeals board shall have the right to limit the presentation of evidence that is not material or relevant, that is repetitive, that constitutes harassment, or is unduly argumentative. Interested parties shall have five minutes to state their case to the community development appeals board at the beginning of the hearing and five minutes to summarize at the end. All hearings shall be recorded, and the recording shall be maintained for at least six months. Except when examining witnesses, all remarks by an interested party shall be addressed to the chairperson. The interested party whose property or use of property is at issue shall have the burden of proof and shall have the right to open and close the evidence and the right to open and close the summary at the end of the hearing. 
(d)  The applicant shall have the burden of proof and persuasion on all questions of fact before the community development appeals board 
(e)  In any matter before the community development appeals board, the county may be considered an interested party. Within ten days of the hearing, the planning and zoning administrator shall mail the decision of the community development appeals board to all interested parties with reasons supporting the decision. 
(f)  Continuance. Any applicant may request, in writing, a continuance of any matter before the board. The zoning administrator shall then administratively grant the continuance provided no previous continuance has been granted to the applicant on the same matter. Any subsequent request for a continuance must be made in writing to the zoning administrator and approved by the community development appeals board. An additional fee shall be required from the applicant for any continuance granted by the zoning administrator. Upon the granting of any subsequent continuance by the community development appeals board, the applicant shall pay a fee of $75.00 to cover all costs incurred to republish the date of hearing and renotify the affected parties. 
13.10 Decisions and findings of board to be a final administrative decision. All decisions rendered by the community development appeals board shall be accompanied by administrative findings. All decisions by the community development appeals board shall in each instance be a final administrative decision. 
13.11 Appeals from decision of board. Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the community development appeals board may take an appeal to the superior court. The appeal to the superior court shall be by writ of certiorari. Such appeal may be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the community development appeals board, and upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days the decision of the community development appeals board shall final. 
13.12 Re-application to the board. If an application for a variance is denied by the community development appeals board, a re-application for such variance may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application, except in the case where the matter is appealed to superior court. In the case of an appeal to superior court, the 12-month re-application time period shall begin to run from the date on which final judicial adjudication is rendered in the matter. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 13.0; Res. of 10-13-98(2); Res. of 4-11-00(1); Res. of 9-25-00(1); Ord. of 12-18-01(1)) 
Sec. 102-14. - Amendments to zoning ordinance. 
The governing authority of the county, after compliance with the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act and after due notice and public hearing, may supplement, modify, vary, or change the boundaries of zoning districts or the requirements of the ordinance by adopting amendments to the zoning map or text of the ordinance. 
14.1.  Initiation of amendment. Amendments to the zoning map or text may be proposed by the governing authority, the planning commission, the zoning administrator, county planner or their respective designee, by any owner of property within the area proposed for change, or that property owner's representative. Where the governing authority, the planning commission, the zoning administrator, county planner or their respective designee initiates or applies for an amendment that proposes taking action resulting in a zoning decision, it shall provide for a hearing before the planning and zoning commission and a hearing before the board of commissioners on the proposed action. Such hearing shall be advertised at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing by publication within the legal organ. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
14.2.  Procedure. 
1.  Prerequisites for planning process—Contents. Prior to processing of any application for rezoning or other land use permit, the applicant (herein defined as a person or entity other than a local government), shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth in this section. The applicant shall be required to file an application with the office of community development containing the following: 
(a)  An appropriate number of copies of a completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development. 
(b)  The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application. In addition, persons having a security interest in the subject property must consent to the application. 
(c)  The nonrefundable application fee which has been established by resolution of the board of commissioners shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of community development. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit a current boundary survey and plat plan, to scale, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer. In the alternative, the applicant may present other similar drawing, sketch, or plans that properly identifies the boundaries and planned development. Such development plan may also include such other information thereon as may be required by the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines, buffer areas, any future right-of-way, wet areas, flood plains, utilities and stormwater retention. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit any other information required by the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee or other county departments which they deem necessary or desirable in processing the application, which is related to the present or proposed use of the property. 
2.  Every applicant filing an application for rezoning involving a request for a nonresidential zoning district, or a residential zoning district where the application(s) is for at least ten acres of contiguous or adjoining lands shall include a complete written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
(a)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(b)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(c)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(d)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(e)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and 
(f)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
3.  Staff report. After the applicant has filed an application for rezoning involving a request for a nonresidential zoning district, or a residential zoning district where the application(s) is for at least ten acres of contiguous or adjoining lands under this section, the zoning administrator or county planner shall make a written recommendation and zoning analysis (staff report). The staff report will relate to the following: 
(a)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(b)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(c)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(d)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and 
(e)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
14.3.  Review by planning commission. 
1.  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on each application for a land use permit or rezoning in accordance with a schedule and procedures adopted by the board of commissioners. A staff report on each application shall be submitted to and considered by the planning commission at the public hearing. In addition to other requirements, the planning commission shall investigate and consider the staff report and any required analysis that is submitted by the applicant. 
2.  As to each application, the planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, continuance, hold, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The planning commission may hold, continue or defer any application for more than one additional scheduled hearing date. Written minutes of the planning commissions' recommendation to the board of commissioners shall be prepared, maintained and submitted to the board of commissioners prior to its hearing. Additionally, the staff report and any required report of the applicant shall be submitted to the board of commissioners. All documents shall thereafter become public record. 
3.  The planning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state law and this Code, which shall be published and available to the public during regular business hours. 
4.  First reading. The planning commission shall conduct a public reading of the application for a land use permit or rezoning at its first available public meeting. No public notice or posting regarding said reading shall be required, but the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee may require the applicant to be present. Upon completion of the reading, the application shall be scheduled for a public hearing. 
5.  Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for amendment. Notice of the time and place shall be advertised and posted pursuant to notice requirements as set forth within O.C.G.A. §§ 36-66-1 et seq., as amended. After conducting the public hearing, the planning commission shall forward its recommendations to the governing authority. 
14.4.  Posting of public notice. > A sign displaying the appropriate information as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, as amended, shall be conspicuously posted and maintained on or near the right-of-way of the nearest public street, so as to be visible from the street under the following conditions: 
1.  The property shall remain posted until a final decision by the applicable board or boards. 
2.  In the event the sign is removed, destroyed, or displaced from its conspicuously displayed location, it is the responsibility of the applicant to immediately notify the zoning administrator or county planner so as to request an additional sign be posted and maintained during the posting period. 
3.  Failure to post and maintain the signs continuously may prohibit consideration of the application at any scheduled public hearing. In the event the signs are not posted continuously, the applicable board, in its sole discretion, may either require the re-posting and re-advertising prior to any future public hearing, for which the applicant shall pay an additional re-advertising fee. 
14.5.  Public hearing by board of commissioners. Before taking action on an application for rezoning and after receipt of the staff report, the planning commission's recommendation and the applicant's report, where required, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with rules and procedures as may be adopted by the board of commissioners from time to time. Prior to or in conjunction with the hearing, the board of commissioners shall review the applicant's report, if any. the staff report and the planning commission's recommendation. All zoning hearings before the board of commissioners shall be conducted according to Georgia law, these policies and procedures, and the administrative provisions of this Code. Visual and sound recordings shall be permitted. Public hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments and are expected to conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners unless answering a question by the same, staff or citizens in attendance. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
2.  In all proceedings before the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners shall allow a minimum time period at hearings on proposed zoning decisions for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion by proponents of each zoning decision and an equal minimum time period for presentation by opponents of each proposed zoning decision, as follows: 
a.  The chairman shall call for an item to be placed before the board of commissioners from the county planner or his designee. 
b.  The board of commissioners shall seek from the zoning applicant a presentation of data, evidence and opinion by the proponent(s) of the zoning application and allow said presentation for a minimum of ten minutes. At the discretion of the chairman, the proponents may be restricted during this presentation to one spokesperson. 
c.  The board of commissioners shall seek from those opposed to the zoning application a presentation of data, evidence and opinion by the opponents(s) of the zoning application and allow said presentation for a minimum of ten (10) minutes. At the discretion of the Chairman, the opponent(s) may be restricted during this presentation to one spokesperson. 
d.  The board of commissioners shall allow a rebuttal of data, evidence, and opinion from the zoning applicant or proponent(s) of the zoning application and allow said rebuttal for a minimum of two minutes. At the discretion of the chairman, the proponents may be restricted during this presentation to one spokesperson. 
e.  The board of commissioners shall allow a rebuttal of data, evidence, and opinion from the opponents of the zoning application and allow said rebuttal for a minimum of two minutes. At the discretion of the chairman, the opponents may be restricted during this presentation to one spokesperson. 
f.  By a affirmative vote of the majority of the board of commissioners, the above stated time for presentation and/or rebuttal may be expanded on an equal basis for the applicant and opponents thereof for comments of all persons desiring to speak in favor or against the proposed application for rezoning. However, the chairman shall have the right to establish time limitations above the minimum stated times if needed due to lengthy presentations or the length of the agenda. 
g.  The board of commissioners shall ask questions of any speakers and/or the county staff according to the staff report(s) to be deemed appropriate. 
h.  The board of commissioners shall conduct any appropriate discussion of the issues presented. 
i.  So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, the board of commissioners may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning classification, district or category requested, add or delete conditions of the application, including but not limited to site-specific conditions, allow a variance based upon a development plan, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this section. 
j.  An action by the board to defer or continue the application may include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application, and no further notice except posting shall be required. In the event a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered by the board of commissioners is not included, the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee shall take necessary actions to post the property. 
14.6.  Fee. Application fees shall be approved by the board of commissioners and conspicuously posted in the planning and zoning department. 
14.7.  Minimum time between applications. A property owner shall not resubmit a proposal for zoning amendment, affecting the same property, more than once in a 12-month period. The 12-month period begins at the date of denial of the application before the board of commissioners. 
14.8.  Withdrawal of application. 
1.  An application for rezoning may be withdrawn by the applicant or his legally appointed representative provided said request is submitted in writing not later than 48 hours before the time set for the public hearing before the board of commissioners. When an applicant does not properly withdraw an application pursuant to the requirements set forth herein, the application shall be withdraw with prejudice and may not again resubmit a proposal for zoning amendment, affecting the same property, for a 12-month period beginning from the date of the application to the office of community development. Any fees paid for the application for rezoning shall be forfeited. 
2.  Computation of time. For purposes of counting time in this section, legal holiday, weekends, and days where the county administrative building is closed shall be excluded. Where the public hearing is scheduled after 5:00 p.m. on a Tuesday, the time to withdraw such application without prejudice shall be submitted in writing no later than 5:00 p.m. the previous Friday. When the time prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. Intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
14.9.  Appeal. If the governing authority executes an action which the applicant or other injured party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the superior court of the county. Findings of fact may not, however, be appealed. Appeals must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the governing authority was taken. 
14.10.  Standards for considering zoning decisions. The decision by the board of commissioners to approve in whole or part, reject, condition or delete an application for rezoning shall be based on, but not limited to, a consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property 
2.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
3.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
4.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and 
5.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
14.11.  No official action. In the event of a tie vote or a vote having less than four affirmative votes from the board of commissioners that results in no official action on a decision related to zoning, the applicant shall file a written request to the clerk of the board of commissioners within 36 hours of said vote requesting that the board reconsider the application at another hearing. If no written request is submitted, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn without prejudice and may be resubmitted within the 12-month limitation of this section. The applicant must comply with the requirements set forth in section 102-14(14.4). This section shall not abrogate any rights that the applicant may have under O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-5, as amended. 
14.12.  Conditional zoning (use of conditions). 
1.  In deciding upon any application for zoning map amendment, the planning commission and board of commissioners may, on their own motion or upon the suggestion of the applicant, grant the application subject to certain conditions or stipulations necessary to promote and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the county. Such conditions shall be imposed for the benefit of the community to lessen any negative effects that the zoning map amendment may cause. 
2.  The board of commissioners may grant any zoning map amendment and include conditions, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Such conditions as are deemed necessary to protect neighbors and to lessen any negative effects of the zoning change; 
(b)  Such conditions may consist of specific use restrictions or the following area and building restrictions: setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; driveway curb cut restrictions; restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; maximum building heights or other dimensions; special drainage or erosion provisions; landscaping or planted area, which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; fences, walls, berms, or other buffering provisions or protective measures; preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation when adjacent to residential districts; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; 
(c)  That the rezoning is conditional and binds the applicant and any successor in title who may construct only those uses and only in such a manner as is depicted upon any development plan submitted and approved with the application. 
3.  Prior to a vote being taken upon any application for zoning map amendment in which conditions shall be imposed, such conditions will be announced at the hearing, presented in writing as part of the development plan, or recorded as part of the official record, and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to present its position on such conditional requirements. If the applicant finds such proposed conditional requirements to be unacceptable, it may, at that time, withdraw its application for zoning map amendment; such withdrawal shall be subject to the requirements as set forth in sections 102-14(14.7) and (14.8). 
4.  If the applicant proposes zoning based upon a development plan, proposes conditions or stipulations in writing, or incorporates conditions as part of a development plan. The written conditions shall be submitted in an appropriate number of copies on 8.5 x 11 paper size to the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee with the application for rezoning. If conditions are proposed after the application has been submitted, the applicant shall submit an appropriate number of copies of said conditions as an amendment to the application prior to final approval of the rezoning by the board of commissioners. Upon approval by the board of commissioners, such conditions shall by reference become a part of the rezoning record. 
5.  If the board of commissioners adopts a zoning map amendment which contains conditional requirements, such requirements shall become a part of this chapter and the official zoning map. Such property shall thereafter carry the suffix "-C" to indicate that such property has been conditionally zoned (e.g., A-C, R30-C, etc.). Such conditions shall be binding upon all owners of the property until removed or modified by the board of commissioners. The zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee shall so indicate in the records of the zoning actions the existence of the conditional requirements. If the zoning administrator, county planner, or their respective designee deems it appropriate and feasible, the suffix "-C" shall be affixed to the zoning map for the appropriate property. 
6.  A conditional requirement may be imposed upon either permitted and/or conditional uses in any zoning district. 
7.  The building inspector shall issue a building permit for the development of the property only in strict compliance with the new zoning category and the further specific conditions added by the applicant and approved by the board of commissioners. 
8.  All proposed zoning amendments, including amendments under this conditional zoning, must be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. However, if the conditions established by the applicant in conjunction with an application for conditional zoning are minor and added after planning commission review of the rezoning proposal, or if the conditions are altered or otherwise changed after planning commission action on the rezoning application as originally submitted, the board of commissioners may, in their discretion, require resubmission to, or review by, the planning commission. 
14.13.  Innovative development plan permit process (IDP). 
1.  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a conditional use permitting process to consider a subdivision development plan, which features an innovative design or a coordinated and distinctive plan that provides a sense of place not ordinarily provided through a conventionally designed subdivision. 
2.  Finding. 
a.  The board of commissioners hereby finds that innovative development plans (hereinafter "IDP"), should be encouraged where such land development plans satisfy the following objectives: 
1.  A novel or inventive layout that incorporates best features of a particular site; 
2.  Substantially preserves and protects existing environmental and ecological conditions with minimal land disturbance activities while providing for abundant open spaces; 
3.  Achieves economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the provision of public or private services and utilities; and 
4.  Planned for and located in a manner that ensures harmony with the surrounding community. 
b.  The board of commissioners hereby finds that innovative development plans proposing infrastructure and required improvements (hereinafter "improvements"), which do not satisfy the general design standards for subdivisions and required improvements as set forth in the subdivision ordinance, may be considered where the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  Durability. Where the improvements are durable and adequately provide for safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian; 
2.  Funding mechanism. If the improvement is proposed to be privately owned, the on-going maintenance of the improvement shall be adequately funded for long term maintenance. 
c.  The board of commissioners hereby finds that the public health, safety, and welfare will be enhanced by allowing innovative development plans satisfying the standards and criteria set forth in this section. 
3.  Application. Applications for innovative development plan shall be submitted for a conditional use permit with all required documentation in accordance with section 102-13. The application shall set forth a detailed description, include design innovations, and the proposed rationale for innovation. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth under Section 13.0(1)(d), the application shall set forth the following site plan: 
a.  All site plans shall be prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect, or professional engineer. All site plans shall be on standard 24" X 36" sheets and shall be prepared at a sufficient scale to show: 
1.  General information, existing conditions, and proposed conditions as set forth in appendix "1", which is attached hereto. 
2.  Please identify the nature and quality of the development that is proposed including but not limited, floor plans, square footage, proposed lot layout, utility plan, parking plan and any amenity package, which may include but not be limited to a common storm shelter, a swimming pool, tot lot, playground, clubhouse, tennis, handball, volleyball, basketball, sidewalks, preservation of natural features, such as lakes and woods, as common open spaces, bike and pedestrian paths and benches, permanent buffer areas around any stream, preservation of any archaeological or historic site, preservation of any habitat for any endangered, rare, or threatened species of plant or wildlife, or dedication of land, acceptable to the county, for use as a school site, fire station, park site, or other public facility. 
b.  The application shall demonstrate compliance with underlying zoning district requirements and any conditions of zoning that may exist and relate to the subject property. 
c.  Staff review. No application for an IDP approval shall be processed until the zoning official has determined whether the application is complete with respect to all of the information required by this chapter. If the application is not complete, the zoning official shall so notify the applicant. When the zoning official determines that the application is complete, the zoning official shall review such application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and section 102-13, and shall forward his or her staff report to the planning commission within 30 working days of certification of completeness. 
4.  Conditional use permit requirements and standards. In its discretion, the board may issue a conditional use permit for such IDP based upon a finding that each of the following has found that: 
a.  The proposed IDP furthers the objectives, conditions, and standards set forth in this chapter are satisfied. 
b.  The minimum tract size for a IDP shall be 60 acres. 
c.  The improvements are durable. The durability of the improvement shall properly function to serve capacity and its intended purpose for a period of 20 years. The capacity of the improvement shall be defined as the maximum demand that can be accommodated by the proposed improvement 
1.  No application for development approval subject to this section shall be considered complete until it provides sufficient information to determine whether the capacity of the proposed improvement is adequate to support the proposed IDP. 
2.  In addition, the application shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The capacity of the improvement. Capacity is the maximum demand that can be accommodated by the improvement. 
(b)  Specifications for the proposed improvements (installed and constructed). 
(c)  A schedule for the commencement and completion of construction, showing phases of construction if applicable. 
(d)  Any other information as requested by the zoning official. The zoning official is the zoning administrator or his designee responsible for reviewing all applications for IDP. 
d.  Funding mechanism. If the improvements are private, the funding mechanism shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The cost and responsibility of maintaining the improvement shall be borne by the property owners or homeowners' association. 
2.  The applicant shall establish necessary regular and periodic operational and maintenance responsibilities for the improvement, to include the following: 
(a)  Staffing needs, insurance requirements, and associated costs, and means for funding the maintenance of the improvement on an on-going basis; and 
(b)  Such funding shall include long-term maintenance improvements as well as regular yearly operating and maintenance costs; 
(c)  At the board's discretion, the subdivider/applicant may be required to escrow sufficient funds for the maintenance and operation costs for up to five years; 
e.  The proposed development meets all requirements for a conditional use permit set forth in Section 13.0(7); and, 
f.  Applicant/subdivider shall comply with all provisions set forth under section 102-9(9.3). 
5.  Appeal. The governing authority shall make a decision with respect to the application and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. The governing authority shall include any condition, requirement or limitation which may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Further appeal on certiorari may be made to the county superior court. 
Appendix "1" 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
1.  Show name of project and date of submittal. 
2.  Show the name, address and phone number of the developer. Show seal and signature of professional engineer or qualified plan preparer. 
3.  The minimum scale for preliminary plats shall be 1" = 100' unless otherwise approved by the Department. 
4.  Plats shall be drawn on no larger than a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet of paper. 
5.  Plats shall include north arrow and show land lot lines and district. 
6.  Provide a tie point to the nearest intersection. 
7.  Plats shall include a location/vicinity map with land lot lines; minimum scale 1" = 2000'. 
8.  Show plat certificates. 
EXISTING CONDITIONS 
1.  State the present zoning of the property. 
2.  Note the zoning case number, date of approval and all variances and conditions of zoning (if applicable). 
3.  Show the zoning of adjacent properties including property owners name, subdivision name, lot numbers, land uses, etc. 
4.  Show any jurisdictional (city or county) boundary lines. 
5.  Show topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet. 
6.  Show location of streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to flooding as determined from past history of flooding or hydraulic engineering calculations of existing conditions. 
7.  Show all structures, both above and below ground, that might interfere with the proposed construction. 
8.  Show name, location, right-of-way, dimension from centerline, pavement width and surface type of all streets and roads on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. 
9.  Show location of right-of-way and easements, railroads, and other utilities on or adjacent to the property. 
10.  Show the size and location of existing water mains, drains, culverts and all other facilities and structures, both above and below ground, within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. 
11.  Identify the watershed basin(s) within which the proposed development is located. 
12.  Identify the acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
13.  Show water pressure and flow test results. 
PROPOSED CONDITIONS 
1.  State the total number of acres and number of lots. 
2.  Show the layout of all lots, including front, side and rear building setback lines, scaled dimensions on lots and utility easements with width and use, and all proposed driveways. 
3.  Note the minimum lot size requirement and square footage area of each lot. 
4.  Show the proposed unit division or stage development, if any. 
5.  Identify all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
6.  Show all require buffers (if applicable). 
7.  Show 10 foot "No Access Easement" along the rear of all double frontage lots. 
8.  Show and state names, right-of-way, dimension from centerline, pavement width and surface type of all proposed roads. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 14.0; Res. of 2-23-99(2); Res. of 4-11-00(1); Res. of 9-25-00(1); Ord. of 5-20-03(1), § 1) 
Sec. 102-15. - Legal status provisions. 
15.1.  Noncompliance. Noncompliance of characteristics of uses of premises and site development created by the application shall not in any way limit the legal use of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair, maintenance, or reconstruction of a noncomplying characteristic or feature; however, in no instance shall the degree of noncompliance be increased except as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. 
15.2.  Notice. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner and he will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs. The owner will notify the Code Enforcement Department that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results. 
15.3.  Violations. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
15.4.  Interpretation. It is not the intention of this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or other agreement between parties, provided, however, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use or premises than is imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. 
15.5.  Conflict with other laws. Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require greater set back lines or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under another ordinance or any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of another ordinance or any other statute require more restrictive standards than those of this Ordinance, the provisions of the other ordinance or such statutes shall govern. 
15.6.  Severability. In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, section, subsection, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The governing authority hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the ordinance if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
15.7.  Repeal of conflicting resolutions. All resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict with this resolution are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 7-14-98(2), § 15.0) 
Sec. 102-16. - Corridor development plan ordinance. 
16.1.  Title. This ordinance [from which this section derived] shall be known and may be cited as the Corridor Development Plan Ordinance of Carroll County, Georgia. (hereinafter, "CDP"). [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
16.2.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this CDP is: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
A.  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the county and its residents; 
B.  To implement the comprehensive plan update. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
C.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
D.  To enhance the value and viability of lands surrounding transportation corridors by preventing the development of land uses which conflict with the roadside and surrounding areas; 
E.  To promote economic growth that enhances employment opportunities, to maintain property values, and to protect the fiscal integrity of the county; 
F.  to protect surface and ground water and other environmental resources, including green spaces, significant habitat and land with exceptional scenic beauty; 
G.  To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are available to serve development as the demands for those facilities and service are created; 
H.  To protect existing and proposed rights of way of all transportation corridors to ensure that these highways continue to serve their primary function and to accommodate increasing volumes of traffic; 
I.  To provide for highway safety and to reduce the hazard from unnecessary points of ingress and egress and cluttered roadside development; 
J.  To establish interim standards to allow for land development that is consistent with the future growth of the county; 
K.  To establish appropriate governance procedures to plan and oversee development to promote the interests and welfare of the community; and 
L.  To maintain predictability and fairness for affected landowners. 
16.3.  Findings. 
A.  The chairman and board of commissioners (the "board"), hereby finds that development in the transportation corridors may generate excessive transportation congestion, introduce unacceptable traffic safety hazards, produce fragmented development patterns that may lead to blight, irreparably harm the aesthetic qualities of the transportation corridors and preclude significant long-term economic development opportunities by development with inadequate levels of service and infrastructure and a concomitant harm to the community from inappropriate development within these transportation corridors, and incompatibility between uses and inadequate public facilities and services; [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
B.  The board hereby finds that the public health, safety and welfare will be enhanced by the regulations of uses and site development in transportation corridors; and [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
C.  The board hereby finds it to be a matter of compelling public interest and necessity to readopt, re-establish, and continue the corridor protection plan ordinance and its development regulations and standards as established herein. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
D.  Administrative review. The board finds that applications for development permits within the transportation corridor that satisfy all standards set forth in appendix A may be administratively approved by the zoning official. Furthermore, the board finds that applications for a development permit within the transportation corridor satisfying the purpose and intent of this CDP may be administratively approved by the director subject to minor exceptions from the standards as set forth in appendix A. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03, 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
16.4.  Definitions. 
A.  To the extent that the words and terms used herein are defined in the Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Ordinance of Carroll County they shall be accorded the same meaning and definition. 
B.  To the extent there is a conflict between the definitions of words contained herein and words defined in the Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Ordinance of Carroll County, the definitions set forth herein shall prevail. 
C.  The following words and terms used herein shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Adequate level of service means minimum infrastructure and service standards required to provide for the demands of the public as set forth in this ordinance and appendix. 
Adjacent means abutting or located within 150 feet of the property from which adjacency is determined, exclusive of land within the public rights-of-way or easements. 
Agricultural production activities means the use of land and/or structures for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiaries, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, the necessary accessory uses for packing, processing, treating or storing of produce; provided that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities means agricultural production activities shall not including packing, processing, treating or storing of animal products as a primary use. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
Applicant means the property owner, or duly designate agent of the property owner who files an application for a development permit pursuant to this ordinance. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Board means the Chairman and Board of Commissioners of Carroll County. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
Certain timber harvesting operations means harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state. 
Change in use means an alteration in activity conducted on or occupying land, structures or land and structures in combination. 
Concurrent and adequate public facilities means existing public facilities and services that can accommodate growth while maintaining an adequate level of service throughout the county. 
County means where not used to describe the territorial boundaries of the unincorporated limits of Carroll County, Georgia, the term "county" is a collective term for the employees, public officials, or boards acting in their official capacity and on behalf of the Carroll County, Georgia to perform duties set forth in this ordinance. [Added Ord. 10/04/05]. 
County corridor overlay district means land within the primary and secondary corridors as shown on County Corridor Overlay District Map. 
County corridor overlay district map means a map delineating land within primary and secondary transportation corridors as more particularly identified in section 16.5.B. 
Dark-sky friendly means installation of lighting fixtures that preserves dark skies while at the same time maximizes the quality and efficiency of outdoor lighting. [Added Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Department means the Carroll County Department of Community Development. 
Development means a subdivision of land, the establishment of a use, the construction or placement of buildings, other structures or roads, any construction, excavation, mining, dredging, grading, filling, clearing or vegetation removal, or the deposit of waste or refuse. The following activities are not considered development: landscape maintenance, including mowing, gardening, tree care and maintenance, or removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces; farming and ranching; and utility, drainage and street repair and maintenance that does not require land disturbance or result in additional impervious cover. 
Development agreement means an agreement between the county and an Applicant containing specific conditions designed to implement the policies and criteria contained in this CDP, which document contains an integrated development scheme for a particular phase or phases of development, and contains maps, diagrams and other appropriate materials by which the Applicant agrees to the conditions contained within the agreement consistent with the provisions of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Development area means the metes and bounds of the portion of the site proposed for development. 
Development permit means any document that approves or conditionally approves an application for land use or development approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance or similar regulations of the county, including but not limited to: 
1.  Any building permit. 
2.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05]. 
3.  Any preliminary of final subdivision plat. 
4.  Any site plan or planned unit development. 
5.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05]. 
6.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05]. 
7.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05]. 
8.  Any other permit, permission, master plan, plan or approval issued by the county, or any agency or department thereof, that authorizes development within the primary or secondary corridors, excepting those activities or permissions specifically exempted or waived under appendix A. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
9.  Notice of certain timber harvesting operations within a transportation corridor. 
Director means the director of the Carroll County Department of Community Development. 
Footcandle means illuminance produced on a surface one foot from a uniform point source of one candela. [Added Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot means [Added Ord. 10/04/05]. 
Lumen means unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit solid angle by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of one candela. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot. One lux is one lumen per square meter. [Added Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Master plan means The Carroll County Comprehensive Plan, as amended. 
New applications means all applications for development permits submitted to the county after the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section derived]. 
Ordinance means The CDP together with appendix A, which is referred to throughout as appendix. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Planning commission means the Carroll County Planning Commission. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
Platted lot means a parcel of land, which has a specific boundary described within a final subdivision plat that has been duly approved and recorded with county. 
Primary corridors. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. All land in the unincorporated area of the county located within 500 feet of the center line of the rights-of-way of the following highways and routes; said primary corridor shall be extended beyond the 500 feet boundary to encompass additional lands under the following circumstances: 
1.  Where a development area contains a portion of land that lies inside the 500 feet and a portion of land lying outside of the 500 feet corridor, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  The development area lying outside of the 500 feet shall comply with this ordinance; 
(b)  Single-family dwellings and uses identified in the agricultural zoning district of the zoning ordinance that lie within the development area identified by subsection (a), (i.e., outside of the 500 feet, shall not be required to comply with this ordinance; and 
(c)  The boundary interpretation rule provided in subsection (a) above shall supersede and govern the location of primary corridor boundaries over any other rules interpreting district boundaries. 
2.  Notwithstanding the manner in which the primary corridor may be extended as provided in paragraph 1. above, the primary corridors are identified and more specifically depicted on the county corridor overlay district map, as follows: 
(a)  State Highway 61 from its origin in Land Lot 140, 5 th Land District, Carroll County to the southern incorporated limits of the City of Villa Rica in Land Lots 131 and 126 of the 6 th Land District; 
(b)  State Highway 166 from the intersection of Maple Street in Land Lot 93 of the 10 th Land District, Carroll County and encompassing State Highway 166 Bypass around the City of Carrollton to the intersection with State Highway 61 in Land Lot 140 in the 5 th District, Carroll County; and 
(c)  U. S. Highway 27 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County, excepting that portion from Land Lots 86 and 107 of the 11 th District, Carroll County, on the boundary with Heard County, Georgia, and running north to the intersection with State Route 5 in Land Lot 89 of the 11 th District, Carroll County. 
Retail business means a retail business shall be defined as a commercial or mercantile activity within a principle building, which has a minimum of 1,000 heated square feet, that is engaged and primarily used for the purpose of transacting a sale of any tangible personal property in any quantity or quantities for any use or purpose on the part of the purchaser other than for resale. The principal building shall not include any dwelling that is used, in any part, as a residential structure. 
Secondary corridors means [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. All land in the unincorporated area of the county located within 300 feet of the center line of the rights-of-way of the following highways and routes; said secondary corridor shall be extended beyond the 300 feet boundary to encompass additional lands under the following circumstances: 
1.  Where a development area contains a portion of land that lies inside the 300 feet and a portion of land lying outside of the 300 feet corridor, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  The development area lying outside of the 300 feet shall comply with this ordinance 
(b)  Single family dwellings and uses identified in the agricultural zoning district of the zoning ordinance that lie within the development area identified by subsection (a), (i.e., outside of the 300 feet), shall not be required to comply with this Ordinance; and 
(c)  The boundary interpretation rule provided in subsection (a) above shall supersede and govern the location of secondary corridor boundaries over any other rules interpreting district boundaries. 
2.  Notwithstanding the manner in which the secondary corridor may be extended as provided in paragraph 1. above, the secondary corridors are identified and more specifically depicted on the county corridor overlay district map, as follows: 
(a)  State Highway 5 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(b)  State Highway 16 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(c)  State Highway 100 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(d)  State Highway 101 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(e)  State Highway 113 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(f)  State Highway 166 from Land Lot 140 of the 5 th Land District of Carroll County to the unincorporated boundary with Douglas County, Georgia; 
(g)  State Highway 166 from the boundary line with the State of Alabama to the western boundaries of the incorporated limits of the City of Bowdon, Georgia in Land Lot 142 of the 9 th Land District; 
(h)  State Highway 166 from the eastern boundaries of the incorporated limits of the City of Bowdon, Georgia in Land Lots 136 and 137 of the 9 th Land District to the western incorporated limits of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, being the intersection of Maple Street in Land Lot 93 of the 10 th Land District, Carroll County; 
(i)  U.S. Highway 78 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(j)  U.S. Highway 27 from the boundary with Heard County, Georgia in Land Lots 86 and 107 of the 11 th District, Carroll County, running north to the intersection with State Route 5 in Land Lot 89 of the 11 th District, Carroll County; 
(k)  Federal Interstate Highway 20 in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County; 
(l)  Northside Drive in the unincorporated limits of Carroll County, which begins from the intersection of State Highway 166 and Bankhead Drive in the incorporated limits of the City of Carrollton in Land Lot 202 of the 5 th Land District to the intersection with U.S. Highway 27 in Land Lot 195 of the 7 th Land District; and 
(m)  State Highway 61 from the northern incorporated limits of the City of Villa Rica to the unincorporated boundary with Paulding County, Georgia. 
Site means The metes and bound of the lot or parcel proposed for development. 
Transportation corridors means primary corridors and secondary corridors. 
Zoning official means the zoning administrator or his designee responsible for reviewing all applications for development permit approval in the primary or secondary corridors during the term of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Zoning ordinance means The Zoning Regulations of Carroll County. 
16.5.  Applicability. 
A.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05]. 
B.  Affected area. This ordinance shall apply to all land within primary and secondary corridors, as shown on the county corridor overlay district map or maps excerpted therefrom, on file with the county department of community development. The map(s) shall be identified by having the title: "County Corridor Overlay District Map(s)", the signature of the chairman of the board of commissioners with the attestation of the clerk of the board of commissioners, together with the seal of the county and the date of the ordinance that the board adopted the map.[Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
C.  Type of uses and development permits affected. This Ordinance shall apply as and to the extent set forth herein, to any and all New Applications. 
D.  Type of uses and development permits not affected. This Ordinance shall not apply to the following: [Amended Ord. 11/18/03] 
1.  Uses and developments for which a development permit is not required pursuant to the zoning ordinance or subdivision ordinance; 
2.  Home occupations, rehabilitation of any existing residential or nonresidential building or structure, accessory uses, or reconstruction of a damaged or destroyed building or structure, provided that such change does not enlarge the building or structure, increase the amount of impermeable surface, decrease the vegetation currently existing on the lot, increase storm water runoff or increase the density or intensity of use of the building or structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a change that increases the intensity of development on the site as measured by any increase in outdoor display area or an increased demand for parking on the site by the greater of 20 percent or five spaces, the use shall be permitted as long as such use shall provide the required landscaping and screening in accordance with article 4 of the appendix of this ordinance. 
3.  Public or private utilities, provided the site shall comply with article 4 of the appendix of this ordinance; 
4.  Building permit for a single-family residence that is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
5.  Agricultural production activities exclusive of processing as a primary use; 
6.  Applications for final plats for developments for which appropriate zoning has been adopted and preliminary plat, which have been submitted prior to the effective date hereof or approval has been obtained prior to the effective date hereof, provided that such preliminary plat approval has not expired; and [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
7.  [Deleted Ord. 08/03/04]. 
8.  Subdivision of land into four or fewer lots having a minimum lot area of at least four acres, provided that such lots comply with the requirements of section 3.2.43.b of the county subdivision regulations. 
16.6.  Review and approval of affected development. 
A.  Development permits. Notwithstanding any provision of the county's Zoning or Subdivision Ordinances to the contrary, no development permit shall be issued and no New Application shall be approved in the Primary or Secondary Corridors during the term of this Ordinance unless, following all other applicable administrative procedures for the issuance of the development permit, the Applicant has obtained approval pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03] 
B.  Scope of review. Review of all applications for a development permit within the transportation corridors during the term of this ordinance shall be undertaken pursuant to the additional review processes and standards set forth herein, together with all existing review processes and standards in existence prior to the adoption of this CDP, including the necessity to properly plan for the further growth and development of the county, and the need to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
C.  Staff review. 
1.  No application for development permit approval or development permit within the transportation corridors shall be processed until the zoning official has determined whether the application for such development permit is an application for development permit approval (or is exempt from this ordinance pursuant to section 16.5.D. herein), and that said application is complete with respect to all of the information required by this ordinance. If the application is not complete, the zoning official shall so notify the applicant within five working days. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
2.  If the zoning official determines that the application is for a development permit approval, the zoning official shall review such application for development permit approval in accordance with the provisions of this CDP. If the zoning official determines that the application is complete, the application shall be processed as follows: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
(a)  Zoning official approval. If the zoning official determines that the application satisfies the standards set forth in appendix A and does not require a minor exception, variance, or conditional use permit, the zoning official is authorized to approve the application for a development permit. Upon approval of the application, the department shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance that sets forth the conditions of approval within 15 working days of certification of completeness. 
(b)  Minor exceptions. If the zoning official determines that the applications does not strictly satisfy the standards set forth in appendix A, but may be considered as a minor exception, he shall forward the application to the director. The director shall review the application and determine whether the application may be authorized as a minor exception. A minor exception is defined as an application that satisfies the purposes and intent of the CDP and no more than an insubstantial deviation from the standards set forth in appendix A. A minor exception is not considered a variance. If the application qualifies as a minor exception, the director shall authorize the approval of the development permit and require the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance that sets forth the conditions of approval within 30 working days of certification of completeness. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
(c)  If the zoning official determines that the application does not satisfy the criteria for zoning official approval or minor exception as set forth in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, the application shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the CDP and section 16.13 of the zoning ordinance, and the zoning official shall forward his or her staff report to the planning commission within 30 working days of certification of completeness. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
3.  Appeals to any action by the zoning official or director, as set forth in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, shall be reviewed as a conditional use permit pursuant to section 16.13 of the zoning ordinance. 
D.  Standards. Attached hereto in appendix A are the standards for development within the primary and secondary corridors during the term of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
E.  Additional studies. In carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to this section, the board or the zoning official may require an applicant for a development permit or application for development permit approval to submit such additional information, data, studies, plans, analyses, or maps as may be necessary to make the factual determinations set forth herein. If so required, the applicant shall bear the full cost of meeting this requirement. 
F.  Enforcement. The CDP may be enforced by the county by any appropriate means authorized by state law and county ordinances including, but not limited to, declaratory and/or injunctive relief, fines, withholding of development permits and revocation of development permit approvals and/or development permits. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
G.  Reconsideration/revocation of approvals and/or permits. An application for a development permit approval and/or for a development permit within the transportation corridors may be reconsidered and revoked by the board (or the director if the approval was granted under section 16.6.C.2(a) or (b)), notwithstanding any other provision of the CDP, if it is determined based upon substantial evidence that the application, decision, or permit was based on materially inaccurate or incomplete information and that correct and complete information was known or was reasonably obtainable by the applicant. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03, 08/03/04] 
H.  Monitoring. 
1.  The zoning official shall be responsible for monitoring and maintaining records of the following for each calendar quarter, during the term of this ordinance: 
a.  Applications for exemptions; 
b.  Applications for development permits; and 
c.  Applications for vested rights determinations; and 
d.  Development agreements. 
2.  Monitoring shall include: 
a.  The name and location of the project; 
b.  The date of application filing; 
c.  The type of application submitted; 
d.  The disposition of the application; 
e.  The reason for the disposition; and 
f.  The cumulative impact of all applications for development permits. 
I.  Amendments. Changes to this CDP must be made in the same manner as its adoption. Nothing herein precludes the board or limits its discretion to make such changes at any time, if deemed necessary or desirable. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
J.  Fees for processing application. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03] 
1.  Due to the regulatory nature of the CDP and the benefit provided through the conditional use permit process, the board finds that it is necessary to establish a reasonable processing fee to defray the cost of the administrative services and functions requiring time commitments from county employees involved in reviewing the application. The fee shall allow the county to recover up to, but not more than, the costs associated with administering the CDP. Based upon the foregoing, the Board hereby establishes the following fee schedule: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
(a)  [Deleted Ord. 08/03/04]. 
(b)  Application approved under section 6 C 2 (a) and (b) - $325.00 [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
(c)  Application approved under section 16.6.C.2(c) - $550.00 
2.  All processing fees paid shall be nonrefundable but may be credited against the total fee the applicant is required to submit where the application is denied under section 16.6.J.1(b) and resubmitted under section 16.6.J.1(c)). 
K.  Time limits. The time limits set forth in this ordinance are mandatory and of the essence; provided, however, that the zoning office, planning commission or board may extend such time periods for a reasonable period of time upon consent of the applicant. Such extension shall indicate the reason for the extension, the additional period of time needed for review, and the purpose for which the application review will be conducted. 
L.  Variances. After considering the staff recommendation and the recommendations of the planning commission, the application for the conditional use permit and evidence provided at the hearing for the conditional use permit, the board may grant variances from the strict application of the standards of this ordinance and other applicable local regulations subject to the following required findings: 
1.  Use variances. The board may authorize uses that are not allowed by this ordinance upon finding that: 
a.  The use will not interfere with legally authorized uses of adjacent properties; 
b.  All outside storage or operations areas shall be completely screened from the transportation corridor by berms that shall be landscaped and are not more than six feet in height, or existing terrain; 
c.  The use is not located within 300 feet of the right-of-way of a transportation corridor; 
d.  The use will not be a detriment to surface or groundwater quality; and 
e.  The site will be designed and the use will be operated in a way that advances the purposes of this ordinance. 
2.  Development standards variances. The board may authorize variances from the strict application of zoning and subdivision standards established in this ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the subdivision regulations, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed variance will not diminish the development's compliance with the purposes of this ordinance; 
b.  The proposed variance will not cause the development to interfere with the legally authorized uses of adjacent properties; and 
c.  The proposed variance represents the least deviation from the standards required to enable viable development of the site. 
M.  Appeals. No appeal to the community development appeals board from any decision of the board, or any request for a variance, shall lie to the community development appeals board from the provisions of this CDP, and the application shall be ripe for judicial review without further exhaustion of administrative remedies upon the determination of the board. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
16.7.  Conditional use permit requirement and standards. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03]. No development permit within the primary or secondary corridors shall be issued unless such development is found that: 
A.  The proposed development furthers the purposes set forth in section 16.2 of this CDP; [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
B.  The applicant has documented the availability of adequate public facilities to accommodate water, wastewater, storm water and traffic needs of the proposed development project, taking into account other approved developments. The availability of adequate facilities may be evidenced by a development agreement entered into between the county and the applicant in accordance with section 16.9 hereof; 
C.  The proposed development conforms to the standards set forth in appendix A attached hereto; 
D.  The proposed development meets all requirements set forth under sections 16.6.C.2(a), 16.6.C.2(b), or for a conditional use permit set forth in Section 13.0(7) of the zoning ordinance; 
E.  The proposed development is consistent with the county's economic goals as articulated in the comprehensive plan and other adopted documents; and 
F.  The proposed development is designed to minimize the loss of highway capacity and safety. 
16.8.  Vested rights determination. 
A.  Application eligibility. Any applicant for a development permit claiming entitlement to application approval on the basis of a development permit granted prior to August 6, 2002 may submit an application for a vested rights determination directly to the board on the following grounds: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
1.  Claiming entitlement to a land use approval or development permit on the basis of common law vesting, equitable estoppel or contractual rights provided the applicant proves by a preponderance of evidence that the owner or contract purchaser, acting in good faith reliance upon some act or omission of the county, has made a substantial change in position or has incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the right to develop or to continue the development of the property; 
2.  Claiming entitlement to development permit approved on the basis of a pre-existing permit; 
3.  Claiming entitlement to development permit approved on the basis of an actual phasing plan, for a non-vested first or subsequent phase pursuant to which the applicant has proceeded in good faith, provided or made provision for required public improvements, has in good faith reasonably relied upon the phasing plan to his, her or its detriment and no approvals or permits have lapsed or been revoked; or 
4.  Claiming entitlement to development approval on the basis of other vested rights principles under state or federal law. 
B.  An application for a vested rights determination shall include the following: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
1.  A technically complete, sworn application on a form prepared by the Department: 
2.  The name and address of the applicant, who shall be the owner, contract purchaser or a person authorized to apply on behalf of the owner; if the property is owned by more than one person, any owner or any authorized agent of the owner may apply; 
3.  A legal description and survey of the subject property of the application; 
4.  The name and address of each owner and contract purchaser of the property; 
5.  A site or development plan for the property; 
6.  A preliminary plat for the property, if subdivision is required by law; 
7.  Identification by specific reference to any ordinance, resolution or other action of the county, or failure to act by the county, upon which the applicant relied and which the applicant believes to support the owner's vested rights claim notwithstanding an apparent conflict with the CDP; [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
8.  A statement of facts which the applicant tends to prove in support of the application; and 
9.  Such other relevant information that the zoning official may request. 
C.  In addition to the required processing as set forth above, an application for a vested rights determination shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: a timing and phasing plan for the proposed development; a plan for the provision of public facilities and services to the proposed development, by phase; the conditions under which the proposed development will be authorized to proceed; and the conditions under which approvals or permits will lapse or may be revoked. 
16.9.  Development agreements. 
A.  In the event that, in the opinion of the department, any one or more of the existing water, wastewater, storm water and/or road facilities, or other public facilities are not adequate to service the proposed development at the county's level of service standards, the applicant and the board may enter into a development agreement, pursuant to which the applicant shall agree to provide the necessary public facility or facilities, at the applicant's sole cost and expense, to service the proposed development, in accordance with the provisions of this section. The development agreement shall provide that all such public facilities shall be constructed or bonded prior to the issuance of a building permit for all or any portion of the proposed development. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
B.  The board may enter into a development agreement with an applicant pursuant to this CDP only if the Board finds that the proposed development which is the subject of the CDP meets all requirements of this CDP, the county zoning regulations, the county subdivision regulations, and all other applicable regulations. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
C.  Contents of a development agreement. 
1.  A development agreement shall be in form satisfactory to the county attorney and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
a.  A legal description of the land subject to the agreement and the names of the legal and equitable owners; 
b.  The duration of the agreement; 
c.  A general description of the development, the development uses permitted on the land including proposed densities, and building intensities and height, and a description of the impacts and benefits of the development; 
d.  A description of the public facilities that will service the development, including those that are to be dedicated, constructed or financed by the developer; 
e.  The date construction of such new facilities will be completed and operation of such facilities will begin; 
f.  A schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with impacts of the development; 
g.  A description of any reservations or dedications of land for public purpose; 
h.  A description of all local development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the land; 
i.  A provision that all public facilities to be provided by the applicant will be constructed or bonded prior to the issuance of a building permit for all or any portion of the proposed development; and 
j.  Such other provisions as are determined by the board to be necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05]. 
2.  Phasing. A development agreement may provide that the entire development or any phase thereof be commenced or concluded within a specific period of time. 
D.  The development agreement is subject to the approval of the board as part of the approval process of the conditional use permit required under this CDP. Where applicable, no conditional use permit shall be approved by the Board until the development agreement shall be executed by the owner of the property which is the subject of the development agreement. For the purposes of this section 16-9, owner shall be deemed to include the lessee under a lease of land with a term of not less than 50 years. Within ten days following the complete execution of a development agreement, the county shall cause such development agreement to be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
16.10.  Effect on existing ordinances; conflict. 
A.  Effect. This CDP is not intended to amend or repeal any existing county ordinance or regulation other than the Interim Development Ordinance that was adopted on August 6, 2002, amended on November 18, 2003, and amended on August 3, 2004. To the maximum extent possible, the requirements of this CDP shall be deemed to be supplemental to, and not in substitution of, existing county ordinances and regulations. Wherever possible, both shall be given effect. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05]. 
B.  Conflict. To the extent of any conflict between other county ordinances or regulations and this CDP, the more restrictive is deemed to be controlling. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
C.  Relationship to existing zoning. The provisions of the county corridor overlay districts established in this ordinance apply in addition to the provisions of the underlying zoning. Where apparent conflicts exist, the more stringent provision shall prevail. The overlay zoning districts established additional standards and review requirements for subject development, but: 
1.  Do not authorize any land use prohibited in the underlying zoning district; 
2.  Do not relax any standards applicable to the underlying zoning district; and 
3.  Do not preclude a change in the underlying zoning through the county's zoning map amendment process. 
16.11.  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this CDP is, for any reason, held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
16.12.  Effective date. This CDP shall be in full force and effect on October 4, 2005. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005(1)) 
APPENDIX A CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN ORDINANCE STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 
1.1 - Minimum submittal requirements.[Amended Ord. 11/18/03] The applicant shall submit the following information and drawings as part of the application for a development permit: 
A.  A completed application and applicable fees. 
B.  Three initial copies of an accurately scaled site plan prepared by a registered architect, registered landscape architect, registered surveyor, or registered engineer showing the locations and dimensions of building footprints of all existing and proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways, landscape areas, utility easements and alignments, stormwater improvements, the limits of construction of the lot or parcel, and the metes and bounds of the extent of development, which shall be referred to hereinafter as the development area. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03, 08/03/04, 10/04/05] 
C.  One initial copy of exterior building elevations and dimensions of all sides of existing and proposed structures. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
D.  One initial copy of exterior building elevations and dimensions of all existing or proposed solid waste and recycling containment areas. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
E.  The exterior finish material selection for each building elevation shall be clearly noted on the drawing and may be shown as a detail inset. For each elevation, the area covered by each finish material shall be calculated as a percentage of the total area of the elevation and shown in tabular format on the drawing. 
F.  To aid in evaluating the exterior design, the applicant shall submit schematic floor plans showing window, door and loading dock locations, and other exterior features that clearly define the intent of the completed exterior of the structure. 
G.  External lighting (to include all new lighting within the development area), heating, ventilating, air conditioning and electrical equipment heights, locations and screening materials shall be clearly noted. Lighting cut-sheets shall be submitted for each new external light. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
H.  Colored renderings clearly indicating color choices or exterior building and finish material samples may be submitted. 
I.  Sign application, if applicable, that meets the requirements of the Regulation of on-premise and off-premise signage. 
J.  Other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of community development, or his designee, in order to evaluate the appearance of the completed structure or as may be specifically required by this appendix. 
ARTICLE II. TRANSPORTATION ACCESS REQUIREMENTS 2.1 Highway capacity. The proposed development will not cause the level of service at any intersection to drop below level of service—D" as calculated in accordance with the most recent version of the—Highway Capacity Manual." 
2.2 - Access 
A.  All lots and parcels shall be accessed from a county road other than Northside Drive, or private road approved by the county. No lot or parcel shall have direct access from a transportation corridor unless specifically approved by the county in accordance with the spacing standards in table 2.1 of this appendix. 
B.  Inter-parcel vehicle access points shall be provided between all contiguous commercial, office or industrial tracts. This requirement may be waived if the applicant demonstrates that an inter-parcel connection is not feasible due to traffic safety or unusual topographic concerns, or the properties both access a street that renders the inter-parcel access unnecessary. 
C.  Undivided driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width. 
D.  Driveways and streets shall be separated in accordance with the spacing standards in table 2.1: 
Table 2.1: Spacing Standards Between Access Points [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 

 
2.3 - Paving standards 
A.  Paving required. All parking areas and driveways for non-residential development shall be paved. Any unscreened outdoor display area for merchandise shall be paved. Surface for outdoor displays shall be prepared in a manner to produce an all weather surface to be approved by the Director. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
B.  Paved surfaces. The entire surface of all paved areas shall be designed and constructed to support anticipated loads. At a minimum, paved areas shall be covered with four inches of concrete or two inches of asphalt on six inches of graded aggregate base, or a base and surface material of equivalent durability as certified by the developer's engineer. Such paved areas shall be maintained in good condition by the owner, lessee and/or occupant of the development. 
C.  Unpaved surfaces. Screened outdoor display and storage areas in accordance with section 4.6 of this appendix, which are not required to be paved, shall be finished with aggregate to form a durable dust-free surface designed to support anticipated loads. 
2.4 - Sidewalks 
A.  The county may, at its sole discretion, require sidewalks within 1/2 mile of a school, park or other public facility. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  All development abutting any public or common greenspace or recreational area that is accessible to the public shall include at least one direct access path to such area. Access paths shall be a minimum of five feet in width, except as provided in section 6.5.A.3 of this appendix, and constructed as required by the county engineer. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
2.5 - Development coordination.All development shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Pedestrian and vehicular circulation shall be coordinated between adjacent properties. 
B.  Development access shall be designed to avoid impeding traffic on public streets intended to carry through traffic. 
2.6 - Corridor setbacks.[Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
All certain timber harvesting operations shall be set back no less than 100 feet from the adjacent transportation corridor edge of pavement. All certain timber harvesting operations must apply the following method, or an alternative method suggested by the county, in order to "thin" trees within 100 feet of the adjacent transportation corridor edge of pavement: 
A.  The applicant will leave a 50 square foot/acre basal area (i.e., the area of a breast-high cross section of a tree or of all the trees in a stand), that is to be evenly distributed throughout the 100 foot corridor setback. 
B.  The applicant will mark the trees to be left at stump and chest height. 
C.  The applicant will remove all diseased trees (Note - diseased trees cannot be counted in the 50 square foot/acre basal area calculation). 
D.  When items 1 through 3 are completed, the applicant may call the Carroll County Department of Community Development for an inspection. 
ARTICLE III. LIGHTING AND UTILITIES 
3.1 - Streetlights. 
A.  Streetlights shall be provided at intersections along all public rights-of-way, when new streets or intersection improvements occur, using fixtures that are deemed dark sky friendly by the manufacturer. All street lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the county engineer. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  Lighting shall be provided throughout all non-residential and multi-family parking areas using box-head, fluted poles, a maximum of 24 feet in height. The county engineer may authorize fixtures that exceed 24 feet. Pedestrian light fixtures, which shall be hooded and less than 14 feet tall, along walkways connecting parking areas and sidewalks shall be provided with the building. Lighting shall be designed to shield public streets and adjacent lands from direct or distracting glare, or hazardous interference of any kind. Direct or distracting glare is defined as 0.5 footcandles of illumination from the source at a distance of five feet inside the property line of an adjacent property owner. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05] 
C.  The director may authorize alternative designs for decorative light poles/fixtures. 
D.  All lighting, except streetlights, whether affixed to a structure or free-standing shall be designed so that the lamp is not visible to an observer at an elevation equal to or greater than the ground line below the light source from any point more than five feet inside the adjacent property. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
E.  All lights shall be directed downwards and shall not cast a cone of light that is greater than 120 degrees total or greater than 60 degrees from vertical. 
3.2 - Utilities 
A.  Electricity and telecommunications. All electric service lines and telecommunications lines shall be located underground. The county engineer may at his/her discretion approve overhead electric distribution lines when the respective utility has demonstrated physical constraints that warrant such placement. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  Stormwater. All development shall comply with state and local regulations regarding stormwater and erosion control. At a minimum, stormwater detention systems will be designed for the 100-year storm event and current best management practices (BMP) at the time of development. Drainage plans shall conform to the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" from the Georgia State Soil and Water Conservation Service and to the Subdivision Ordinance. 
C.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
D.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
E.  State waters. All proposed development within the corridor boundary must be more than 200 feet from state waters and must disturb less than one acre to be exempt from an LDA (Land Disturbance Activity) permit. Otherwise, an E&S (Erosion & Sedimentation) plan and permit is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
ARTICLE IV. LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 - Purpose and applicability.The purpose of these bufferyard and screening requirements is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by establishing efficient, effective minimum standards for buffering between land uses of different intensities, screening of land uses and utility and equipment areas that may create a negative impact, for the protection of natural resources, and the installation and continued maintenance of landscaped areas within the county corridor overlay districts. Where necessary to interpret the precise meaning of technical landscaping terms used in this section, reference shall be made to The American Standard For Nursery Stock, as published by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN). All new development or redevelopment required to submit a site plan shall comply with the landscaping standards in accordance with the table 4-1: 
Table 4-1 

 
4.2 - Exceptions.Landscaping standards shall apply to remodeling projects that increase floor area, increase outdoor display area, or increase parking requirements by the greater of 5 spaces or 20 percent of the parking requirement for the previous use. 
4.3 - Landscaping plan required.A plan showing required bufferyards and landscaping of the bufferyards shall be submitted in support of a site plan or building permit for any development within a development area, except for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. All landscaping plans for bufferyards and related areas shall include the following information: 
A.  The locations, varieties, number and size of plants to be planted within required landscaped bufferyard areas; 
B.  Topographic information showing the final site grading and drainage for landscape area, and properly specify planting for areas needing slope protection; 
C.  Impervious surfaces, including sidewalks, pavement areas and building footprints; 
D.  Property boundaries; 
E.  Mature sizes of plant materials shall be drawn to scale; 
F.  Existing trees that measure eight-inch caliper or larger, as measured 2.5 feet above ground level that are proposed to be retained; and 
G.  The boundaries and edge treatments of all landscaped and bufferyard areas. 
4.4 - Minimum plantings and sizes of landscape materials 
A.  Landscape materials shall measure the minimum sizes at the time of planting as described below. 
1.  Trees: [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
A.  Deciduous trees: Two-inch caliper measured at six inches above ground level. [Added Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  Evergreen trees: Shall measure a minimum of five to six feet in height. [Added Ord. 08/03/04]. 
2.  Shrubs: 12 inches tall from ground level to the top of the shrub, except that shrubs used for screening shall be at least 2.5 feet tall at planting and shall reach a mature height of five feet. 
B.  Minimum landscape area. All development subject to this ordinance shall provide required screening, foundation landscaping, parking lot landscaping, bufferyards and street trees. The total landscape area shall not be less than 15 percent of the project area of multi-family residential, commercial and industrial development areas. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
C.  Minimum planting requirements. The minimum number of plants shall comply with the standards in Table 4-2. (see appendix A-2, Carroll County Required Tree and Shrub List; other trees and shrubs may be substituted based upon the approval of the director or the director's designee. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Table 4-2: Required Plantings 

 
* A large tree includes any tree that typically reaches 30 feet or more in height at maturity. All other trees are considered small or medium sized trees. 
D.  New plant materials. All new living plant materials shall satisfy the requirements of No. 1 or better as defined in the most current edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants. All separate landscaped areas shall have a minimum variety of two living plant materials. Paving and artificial plants shall not be counted towards required landscape area. 
E.  Lawn grass and ground covers: Grass shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded except that yards fronting the transportation corridors shall be sodded only. In addition sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where plant material other than solid sod or grass is used, a fast-growing grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. The director may at his/her discretion determine whether a yard is a front, side or rear yard [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
Table 4.3: [Deleted Ord. 08/03/04] 
F.  Existing plant material. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the extent feasible. The area encompassed by the canopy of any existing trees retained shall be credited towards the total landscape area requirement. 
G.  Soils. The planting beds for all landscaping materials shall be free of weeds, debris, and noxious material and shall consist of a healthy plant growth medium. The planting bed soils shall provide adequate support, drainage, and nutrients for the plants and thus may require the incorporation of sand, peat, and/or topsoil into the soil. Such soils shall be placed throughout the planting hole for each plant, and this hole shall be at least twice as wide as the width of the plant ball and 1.5 times as deep as the depth of the plant ball. 
H.  Planting areas. A minimum planting area of 100 square feet shall be provided for every tree. These planting areas shall be no less than ten (10) feet wide for a large tree and no less than five feet wide for other landscape materials. 
I.  Streetscape. Applicants shall provide a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip between all road rights-of-way and the back-of-curb of abutting off-street paved parking lots. At least one tree shall be planted every 100 linear feet along the street. 
J.  Parking lots. For any off-street parking lot containing over ten spaces, or for any combination of parking areas on a single lot providing more than ten spaces, compliance with minimum landscaping shall be required. 
1.  At least 30 percent of the landscaping requirement for non-residential development shall be provided within or abutting parking areas. 
2.  Parking lot shade trees may be located at the end of parking bays, between parking bays, and along the perimeters of parking lots, provided that no parking space shall be farther than 100 feet from the trunk of a tree. 
3.  Vehicle overhang into planting strips is allowable with a minimum separation of three feet between the curb and any tree or shrub. Wheel stops will be used where curbing does not provide the minimum vehicle/tree separation. 
4.5 - Bufferyard standards.The following bufferyard standards shall apply to all subdivisions, and to all multifamily, commercial and industrial projects. Site plans shall include detailed drawings of enclosure and screening methods to be provided. Table 4-4 lists the types of bufferyards required between adjacent land uses. Exhibit 4-1 illustrates the minimum widths and plantings for each type of bufferyard listed in table 4-4. 
A.  Bufferyards required. Bufferyards shall be required between parcels with different land uses as listed in table 4.4 and as otherwise required herein. The bufferyard is required in addition to other landscaping requirements, provided however, that bufferyard plantings may be counted toward total landscape area requirements. The county may authorize a reduction of bufferyard requirements where the land use on abutting property is not consistent with the comprehensive plan. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  Types of bufferyards required. Table 4-4 shows the type of bufferyard required to buffer an adjacent property based on its land use. Exhibit 4-1 illustrates a typical bufferyard for each type. The applicant may choose to install any of the sub-types of bufferyards. For instance, D-1, D-2 and D-3 are subtypes shown in exhibit 4-1. 
C.  Bufferyard location. Bufferyards and open spaces shall be provided on the site of the new development, regardless of existing setbacks, bufferyards or open space otherwise provided on the adjacent property. Bufferyards may be included within required building setbacks and shall be shown as landscape areas on the plat and site plan. 
Table 4-4: Required Bufferyards [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05] 

 
Exhibit 4.1: Bufferyard Planting Illustrations* 
Distances shown are the minimum widths of required bufferyards. The type of bufferyard shall be consistent with table 4.4. The applicant shall determine which subtype (e.g., B-1, B-2 or B-3) to use on the property. 

Notes: [Notes added Ord. 08/03/04] 
1.  The applicant has the option to plant only trees (and not shrubs) in Bufferyards D and E. If this option is pursued, the applicant must plant 10 evergreen trees per 100 feet on ten-foot centers 
2.  The applicant has the option to plant only deciduous trees in Bufferyard B. 
3.  Opaque fence required in Bufferyard E 
4.  All telecommunications towers (i.e., cell towers), shall utilize Bufferyard E-1. [Added Ord. 10/04/05] 
4.6 - Screening and fence standards 
A.  Screening of utility areas and equipment. 
1.  Solid waste collection areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from public view of adjoining residential properties or any street right-of-way with a 6-foot (plus or minus 8 inches) solid enclosure with a gate and shall be constructed of cedar, redwood, masonry or other compatible building material. 
The floor of the gated enclosure shall be a concrete pad which shall extend 5 feet beyond the gate and the gate opening itself shall measure 12 feet. Trash enclosures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential zoning district or use, and the transportation corridor right-of-way, but may otherwise be located within any required building setback area. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
2.  Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment, including ventilators and satellite dishes shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet of the subject lot as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. Director may waive the requirements of this subsection where screening is incompatible in scale, form, and mass with the appearance of the roof mounted equipment and parapet and such screening provides no aesthetic benefits with screening.[Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
(b)  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
B.  Fencing standards. 
1.  Height. Fences shall not exceed six feet in height in agricultural or residential districts except where used for public utilities, public or private schools, public or private recreation facilities or industrial uses, and where required for existing wrecking/disposal operations and junk or salvage yards. 
2.  Barbed wire fencing. Barbed wire fences, razor wire or barbed wire assemblies atop fences shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any transportation corridor right-of-way, except where incorporated into fencing for telecommunications and utility substations. 
C.  Commercial and industrial equipment and lot screening. 
1.  Purpose. The intent of commercial and industrial lot screening is to ensure that items that cannot be enclosed within a building are screened on all sides from the view of adjacent rights-of-way and residential zoning districts. 
2.  Boundary landscaping. In all commercial and industrial districts, boundary landscaping shall be provided along the abutting public rights-of-way (except alleys). Such landscaping shall consist of a combination of ground covers and deciduous and evergreen shrubs and may also include trees provided that they will not obstruct sight distances or vehicular or pedestrian circulation. No specific spacing shall be required for boundary landscaping, provided that the landscaping is appropriate to the character of the site and that the overall planting density complies with section 4.4 and section 4.5 of this appendix. 
3.  Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage and operations yards shall be screened from view from adjacent rights-of-way and residential areas using a combination of landscaping, and fencing. Such screens shall contain sufficient planting to comply with table 4.4 planting standards. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
4.7 - Timing of installation of required landscaping.All required landscaping shall be in place prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, weather permitting. In periods of adverse weather conditions, temporary approval to occupy may be granted, subject to the posting of a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to one and one-half times the estimated cost of the landscaping, with the estimated cost to be certified by a landscape provider. The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited if the landscaping is not completed within one year after the approval of the temporary occupancy. Forfeiture of any cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility to maintain the required landscaping. [Added Ord. 10/04/05] 
4.8 - General landscaping and site maintenance 
A.  The property owner, lessee and/or occupant shall be responsible for maintenance of any landscaping and any landscaped bufferyard on the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include, but not be limited to, mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, weeding and other activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Failure to maintain the landscape plantings shall be a violation of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other materials or plants not a part of the landscaping. 
C.  All required plant material shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition as is appropriate for the season. Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season. 
4.9 - Certification of completion.Upon completion of the landscape improvements, the development shall be inspected by the Department of Community Development for compliance with the approved landscape plan before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structures, except as allowed by §4.7. 
ARTICLE V. PARKING AND YARD SETBACKS 
5.1 - Parking standards.In addition to the following general requirements and the parking lot landscaping requirements of article 4 of this appendix, all development shall comply with requirements set forth in this article. 
5.2 - Parking and loading requirements. 
A.  On-site parking required. All required off-street parking shall be provided on the same parcel or same development as the principal use. The location and design of off-street parking spaces shall not interfere with normal traffic flow or with operation of queuing and backup areas. Loading areas shall not obstruct pedestrian pathways. Each parking space shall be accessible from a driveway. Maneuvering and turning areas shall be provided so that no vehicle will be required to back into a public street. 
B.  Use of required off-street parking areas. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the use of residents, customers, patrons, and employees. Required parking spaces shall not be used for the storage, sale or display of goods or materials or for the sale, repair, or servicing of vehicles. All vehicles parked within off-street parking areas shall have a current state license tag and be operable. Delivery vehicles shall use loading areas and shall not occupy required parking spaces for more than 24 consecutive hours. 
C.  Off-street parking to be retained. Required off-street parking and loading spaces associated with newly erected or altered buildings or newly established uses of land shallbe a continuing obligation of the owner of said building or land so long as the structure or use exists or its use requiring vehicle parking or loading facilities continues. In addition, it shall be unlawful for: 
1.  Any owner, lessee and/or occupant to discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or change of the required vehicle parking or loading spaces (apart from the discontinuance, sale ortransfer of the building or use) without establishing alternative vehicle parking or loading spaces which meet the requirements of and are in compliance with this ordinance, or 
2.  Any owner, lessee and/or occupant to use a building or lot without providing vehicle parking or loading spaces which meet the requirements of and are in compliance with this ordinance. 
D.  Parking lot dimensions. The minimum required dimensions for regular parking spaces, handicapped parking spaces, and access/circulation drives are as follows: 
1.  Standard spaces for angled or perpendicular parking shall be nine feet wide by 20 feet long. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
2.  Handicapped spaces for angled or perpendicular parking shall be 11 feet wide by 20 feet long. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
3.  Standard parallel parking spaces shall be 9 feet wide by 22 feet long. 
4.  Handicapped parallel parking spaces shall be 11 feet wide by 24 feet long. 
5.  One-way parking driveway aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
6.  Two-way parking driveway aisles shall be at least 24 feet wide, except that when all parking is angled, the minimum aisle width may be reduced to 22 feet wide with the approval of the county engineer. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
5.3 - Parking spaces required 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with table 5.1. For any use not listed in the table, the standards for the most similar use shall be applied. The county shall determine the required number of spaces by classifying the unlisted use as similar to a use specified in table 5.1. In making the determination, any evidence of actual parking demand for similar uses shall be considered as well as other reliable traffic engineering and planning information that is available. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
Table 5.1: Minimum Off-Street Parking And Loading Standards [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 

 
5.4 - Loading Space Ratios.Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the letter indicated in the Loading Column of Table 5.1 and the following conversion factors: 
A.  Standard "A" - 1 space for the first 5,000 sf of GFA as defined above + 1 space for each additional 30,000 sf of floor area. 
B.  Standard "B" - 1 space for the first 10,000 sf of GFA as defined above + 1 space for each additional 50,000 sf of floor area. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
C.  Standard "C" - 1 space for the first 10,000 sf of GFA as defined above + 1 space for each additional 100,000 sf of floor area. 
D.  Standard "D" - 1 space per 50 beds for all facilities containing 20 or more beds. 
5.5 - Handicapped space ratios.The number of handicapped spaces required may be included within the overall total number of parking spaces required. The minimum number of handicapped spaces shall comply with the table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Handicapped Accessible Spaces Required [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 

 
Note: Designated "van" accessible spaces are not required if all accessible spaces comply with "universal parking design." 
5.6 - Parking space location.Developments containing 7,500 or fewer square feet of gross floor area shall provide no more than 80 percent of parking areas between the building and the transportation corridor right-of-way. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
ARTICLE VI. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 
Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
6.1 - Building facades.[Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
A.  Building façades for new buildings. Building facades shall be of the following architectural treatments: 
1.  Front façade—Shall be constructed of glass, stucco, brick and/or masonry, except that metal siding may be used provided that it covers not more than 25 percent of any Front Façade, including banding, cornice and roofing with a pitch of 12:12 or steeper (12 vertical feet for every 12 horizontal feet). 
2.  Side façade—Shall be constructed of glass, stucco, brick and/or masonry, except that metal siding may be used provided that it covers not more than 25 percent of any side Façade, including banding, cornice and roofing with a pitch of 12:12 or steeper (12 vertical feet for every 12 horizontal feet). 
3.  Rear façade—May be constructed solely of metal siding. 
4.  The director may at his/her discretion make the determination whether any certain façade is a front, side, or rear façade. 
B.  Building facades for additions to existing buildings 
1.  Building façade requirements for additions to existing buildings shall be exempted under the following circumstances: 
(a)  Where the proposed building addition is not visible from the transportation corridor right-of-way; the director may at his/her discretion make the determination whether an addition to an existing building is visible from the transportation corridor right-of-way; or 
(b)  Where the total proposed building addition is the greater of the following: 
(1)  Equal to or less than 300 square feet of the footprint of the existing building; or 
(2)  Equal to or less than ten percent of the footprint of the existing building. 
2.  If the addition to an existing building is deemed visible from the transportation corridor right-of-way by the Director, then appendix A: 6.1 A will apply. 
6.2 - Colors.Contrasting accent colors of any wall, awning or other feature shall be limited to no more than 30 percent of the total area for any single façade, including banding, cornice and roofing with a pitch of 12:12 or greater. The remainder of facades shall be a muted, earth-tone color unless specifically approved by the county. Approved earth-tones include, but not limited to, whites, browns and grays. Metal siding may be used solely on facades not visible from the transportation corridor right-of-way. For purposes of this section, "visible" means capable of being seen from the right-of-way of the transportation corridor. For example, if two or three sides of a building or structure are visible, each of the visible sides must comply with this Article. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04, 10/04/05] 
6.3 - Accessory structures.Accessory structures shall be constructed with the same materials as the principal structure and shall match the predominant facade colors and roof lines. Sign materials and colors shall be consistent with those of the principal structure unless specifically approved through the conditional use process. 
6.4 - Roof lines. 
A.  Buildings and accessory structures of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed with minimum 4:12 roof pitches (four feet in rise for every 12feet in run) or may be designed with flat roofs having thre plane parapets where each side that is visible from the transportation corridor right-of-way. Banding and roofing materials of accessory structures, which shall include, but not be limited to gasoline sales island canopies, shall match the materials and colors of the primary structure. Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Metal standing seam. 
2.  Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
3.  Tile, slate or stone. 
4.  Wood shake or wood shake appearance. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03] 
B.  Buildings of 5,000 square feet or greater shall have at least four roof planes, provided however that the Commission may recommend and the county may approve the use of flat roofs with parapets surrounding all sides visible from transportation corridor right-of-way. Parapets shall simulate at least 3 roof planes per building face. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04] 
6.5 - Ground level equipment.All electrical and mechanical equipment other than public utility equipment that is located at ground level shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from the right-of-way of an arterial street or residential zoning district within 150 feet of the subject lot. Such screens and enclosures shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. [Added Ord. 10/04/05] 
6.6 - Big box standards.Buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of floor area shall comply with the standards in this section in addition to the provisions in all other sections of this CDP. Italicized text reflects the county's findings supporting, and intent of, the non-italicized regulatory text. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
A.  Site design. 
1.  Community spaces: Large retail developments shall provide outdoor spaces and amenities to link structures with the remainder of the community. Passenger drop-off/pick-up points shall be integrated with traffic patterns on the site. Special design features shall enhance the building's function as a center of community activity. 
(a)  Each retail development shall provide at least two of the following design features: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, window shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower, or other focal feature approved by the board. 
(b)  Each of these features shall be constructed of materials that match the principal structure and linked by sidewalks to the principal structure. 
2.  Landscaping: all buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of floor area shall provide the following landscaping: 
(a)  Peripheral: A 30-foot wide landscaped buffer shall be provided along all property lines abutting roadways, with breaks for approved access points. A minimum1 15-footwide landscape buffer shall be planted along all other property lines. No parking is permitted within these required landscape areas. The minimum setback for any building facade shall be 50 feet from the nearest property line. Where the facade faces adjacent residentially zoned property, a minimum six feet tall earthen berm shall be provided, which shall be planted with evergreen trees planted at intervals of not more than 20 feet on center. 
(b)  Parking lot: A minimum of five percent of the area within the boundaries of the parking lot shall be landscaped. Landscaped areas shall be protected by raised curbs or fixed wheel stops approved by the county engineer, and shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in size. No parking space shall be located more than 100 feet from a tree. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of four for every required tree. 
3.  Pedestrian circulation: Pedestrian accessibility opens auto-oriented developments to nearby neighborhoods, thereby reducing traffic impacts and enabling the development to project a friendlier, more inviting image. This section sets forth standards for public sidewalks and internal pedestrian circulation systems that will provide user-friendly pedestrian access as well as pedestrian safety, shelter, and convenience. All buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of floor area shall provide the following: 
(a)  Sidewalks at least six feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street. 
(b)  Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than six feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that includes trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, groundcovers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of its length. 
(c)  Sidewalks, no less than six feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade. 
(d)  Internal pedestrian walkways provided in conformance with part b above shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades within ten feet of all customer entrances. 
(e)  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as wellas the attractiveness of the walkways. 
4.  Parking lot orientation. For any retail building, no more than 80 percent of the off-street parking area for the entire property shall be located between the principal building(s) and the transportation corridor. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
5.  Outdoor storage, trash collection and loading areas. The following standards are intended to reduce the impacts of outdoor storage, loading and operations areas on adjacent land uses. While these uses often are necessary, they should be attractively screened from adjacent parcels and streets. All buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of floor area shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and evergreen landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and property lines. 
(b)  No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 30 feet of any internal pedestrian way. 
(c)  Outdoor storage, HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping plan. Views of these areas shall be screened from visibility from all property lines and separated from pedestrian areas. 
(d)  Screening structures shall be made of the same materials as the principal structure. 
(e)  Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used as in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors on the building. 
(f)  For structures on parcels abutting a residential district, no delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the applicant submits evidence that sound barriers between all areas for such operations effectively reduce noise emissions to a level of 45 dB or less, as measured at the lot line of any adjoining residential property. 
B.  Building design. 
1.  Facades and exterior walls. The following standards, which apply to all building facades which are visible from adjoining public streets or properties, are intended to reduce the massive scale of large buildings which, without application of these standards, be incompatible with County's desired character. 
(a)  Facades greater than 150 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 150 horizontal feet. 
(b)  Ground floor facades of retail businesses that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than 60 percent of their horizontal length, excepting side and rear facades that are landscaped with a type B bufferyard. 
2.  Detail features. Buildings should have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest, at the scale of the pedestrian, reduce massive aesthetic effects, and reflect the local character. The following elements should be integral parts of the building fabric, and not superficially applied trim or graphics, or paint: color changes, material changes, texture changes and relief feature (such as offsets, projections and reveals). 
3.  Roofs. The following standards are intended to foster variations in roof lines to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of, large buildings. Roof features should complement the character of adjoining development. Roofs shall have no less than two of the following features: 
(a)  Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting walland such parapets shall not at any point exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature three dimensional cornice treatment and shall not be of a constant height for a distance of greater than 150 feet. 
(b)  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past the supporting walls, for no less than 30 percent of the building perimeter. 
(c)  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run. 
(d)  Three or more roof slope planes. 
4.  Materials and colors. The following standards are intended to ensure that large structures are consistent with the community's aesthetic values: 
(a)  Predominant exterior buildings materials shall be high quality materials. These include, without limitation: brick, wood, rock, or tinted and textured concrete masonry units. 
(b)  Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but these colors may not comprise more than 30 percent of any building facade. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
(c)  Not more than 20 percent of exterior building materials shall include the following: pre-fabricated steel panels. [Amended Ord. 10/04/05] 
5.  Entryways. Large retail buildings should feature multiple entrances. Multiple building entrances reduce walking distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks, and provide convenience where certain entrances offer access to individual stores, or identified departments of a store. Multiple entrances also mitigate the effect of the unbroken walls and neglected areas that often characterize building facades that face bordering land uses. 
(a)  All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting public street shall feature at least one customer entrance. Where a principal building directly faces more than two abutting public streets, this requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building, including the side of the building facing the transportation corridor, and another side of the building facing another street. 
(b)  Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character to the building. The following standards identify desirable entryway design features. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following: 
• Canopies or porticos 
• Overhangs 
• Recesses/projections 
• Arcades 
• Raised corniced parapets over the door 
• Peaked roof forms 
• Arches 
• Outdoor patios 
• Display windows 
• Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design 
• Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
6.  Mechanical appurtenances. External mechanical appurtenances such as heating and air conditioning equipment shall be screened and finished to match the colors of adjacent building materials. 
ARTICLE VII. USE LIMITATIONS 
Land within the transportation corridor may be used as permitted in the underlying zoning district in which the land is located, subject to the conditions of this ordinance and the following: 
7.1 - All transportation corridors.The following uses are prohibited in any county corridor overlay district: 
A.  Junkyards; 
B.  Salvage yards; 
C.  Outdoor recycling facilities; 
D.  Concrete or asphalt batch plants; 
E.  Manufactured home parks; 
F.  Outdoor sales, storage or displays of merchandise, except as authorized in section 7.4 of this appendix; and 
G.  Outdoor operations, except when within a fully screened area. 
7.2 - Primary corridors.The following uses are prohibited in any primary corridor: 
A.  Residential subdivisions within 300 feet of the primary corridor right-of-way. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
B.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
7.3 - Secondary corridors.The following uses are prohibited in any secondary corridor: 
A.  Any development requiring the provision of centralized sanitary sewer service, except pursuant to an improvement agreement between the county, the applicant and the service provider. 
B.  [Deleted Ord. 10/04/05] 
7.4 - Specific use standards.The following standards apply to specific uses that may be established within the corridor overlay districts: 
A.  Outdoor display of automobiles, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, farm vehicles, manufactured or modular homes is authorized in the primary and secondary corridor overlay district by development permit subject to the placement of all display items on a paved or a porous surface approved by the engineer. Modular or manufactured homes must be skirted to conceal supports. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03, 08/03/04]. 
B.  Outdoor display of any other goods, other than that specifically provided for in section 7.4 A, shall be limited to screened areas located on the opposite side of the primary structure from the transportation corridor right-of-way so as to screen the use from the transportation corridor right-of-way. [Amended Ord. 11/18/03] 
C.  Temporarily outdoor display permit (TODP) [Subsection Added Ord. 11/18/03] 
1.  Intent. It is the intent of the temporarily outdoor display permit (TODP) to establish a temporary outdoor display use of a limited area in a commercial zoning district within the overlay districts. 
2.  Administrative review. The Board of commissioners finds that a temporary outdoor display of sales and products, which are related to the primary business use of the lot or parcel, may be permitted under administrative review and by approval from the zoning official for a limited time period. 
3.  Applications. Applications for a TODP shall include an appropriate number of copies of a completed application to be filed on forms prescribed by the department. The application shall contain the following: 
(a)  The notarized signatures of the applicant and at least 51 percent of all record titleholder(s) shall appear upon the application; 
(b)  The nonrefundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid for each permit event; 
(c)  Any other information reasonably necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this Subpart, and as applicable, conformity with the standards herein; 
(d)  A separate statement of the applicant that recognizes the temporary nature of the TODP and that certification that the applicant and landowner shall cause the removal of the temporary outdoor display on the termination of the permit event of the TODP; and 
(e)  The application shall comply with paragraph C 7, general conditions. 
4.  Administrative approval. All applications will be subject to review for completeness by the zoning official. During the review process, the zoning official may confer with the director before making a written decision on the application. If the requirements of this section are satisfied, the zoning official shall issue a TODP within threedays of receipt of a completed application. If the requirements of this subsection are not met, the zoning official shall deny the application for the TODP. 
5.  TODP use defined in time. Where a TODP is granted, the use may continue for a three consecutive day period (hereinafter referred to as a "permit event"). 
6.  Renewal of a TODP. An applicant may renew the TODP for a total of six permit events for every calendar year. The renewal application shall comply with paragraph C 7, general conditions. To reapply, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(a)  A completed application to be filed on forms prescribed by the office of community development; 
(b)  A nonrefundable application fee of $25.00; 
(c)  Other information reasonably necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions of this subpart; and 
(d)  A separate statement of the applicant that recognizes the temporary nature of the TODP and that certification that the applicant and landowner shall cause the removal of the temporary outdoor display on the termination of the permit event of the TODP. 
7.  General conditions. The following general conditions shall apply before a TODP is issued. 
(a)  The lot or parcel shall be designated within a commercial zoning district; 
(b)  The outdoor display of products shall be related to the primary business use of the lot or parcel; and 
(c)  The total temporary display area that may be permitted is no more than 15 percent of the total floor area of the retail business located upon the lot or parcel. All outdoor display shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the public right-of-way. No vacant lot or parcel may be used as for a TODP, except as provided in paragraph 8. 
8.  Holiday TODP. From October 1 through the end of the calendar year, a property owner having property within the overlay districts may submit an Application for a Holiday TODP, in compliance with paragraph 3 (a), (b), (c), and (d), that complies with the following: 
(a)  The lot or parcel may be designated in any zoning district; 
(b)  The holiday TODP may be granted for 60 consecutive days; 
(c)  The total temporary display area under a Holiday TODP is 10,000 square feet; 
(d)  A vacant lot or parcel may be used for a temporary outdoor display area under a holiday TODP; and 
(e)  Outdoor display and sales shall be limited to agricultural and horticultural products. By way of example but not being limited thereto, such products may be trees, wreaths, and pumpkins. 
9.  Posting of TODP card or holiday TODP card. Where a TODP or holiday TODP has been granted, the permit holder or his/her agent shall post the TODP card or holiday TODP in a conspicuous location on the lot or parcel, visible from the transportation corridor, and if not visible from that vantage, the TODP card or holiday TODP shall be posted to be visible from the nearest street or road. The TODP card or holiday TODP shall be protected from the weather and placed in such position and the permit holder shall maintain the TODP card or holiday TODP in such position until such permit event has expired. 
10.  Any violation of this section, its paragraphs, provisions, standards, or conditions herein or placed upon the TODP, including paragraph 8, shall terminate the TODP. At the expiration of the TODP or in the event the TODP is terminated, all outdoor display items, products and the like shall be immediately removed so as to comply with the permanent outdoor display provision of this CDP. [Amended Ord. 08/03/04]. 
11.  Appeal of decisions. Any person, person or entities whose application for a TODP is denied by a decision by the zoning official may appeal the decision within 30 days of their denial to the board of commissioners. Failure to file an appeal within 30 days of the decision of the zoning official shall result in a final decision. W ith the transmission of the appeal, the zoning official shall include the written reasons for the denial and any other pertinent circumstances that may be relevant to the appeal. 
(a)  The appeal shall be posted and advertised as a conditional use permit and appeal from an application for a TODP prior to being placed on the agenda for a hearing. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall review the decision of the director under the standards set forth in section 13.0 of the zoning ordinance. Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision by the board of commissioners on a TODP, including paragraph 8, may take an appeal to the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari. 
          
Carroll County, Georgia  Corridor Development Plan Ordinance  (CDP) 
  

  
  
Required Tree and Shrub List 
Required Tree List 

 
Required Shrub List 

 

Note: All the trees and shrubs listed above are appropriate for Carroll County's Plant Hardiness Zone (Zone 7b - See map directly above). 
Sources: 
□ University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service  Horticulture 3  Leaflet 350,/Revised June, 2003  www.ces.uga.edu/pubcd/L350.htm ;21; Horticulture Fact Sheet H-94-019 
□ Carroll County Extension Service 
□  www.ces.ncsu.edu (North Carolina Cooperative Extension) 
(Ord. of 10-4-05, App. A) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 