CODE OF ORDINANCES PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: December 13, 1994 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF 
PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Charles Bartlett, Chairman  Jack Taylor  Anna Lumpkin  Jimmy Walker  Ira Hicks, Jr. 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Charles R. Adams 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Marcia D. Willis 
County Clerk-Treasurer 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF 
PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Melvin E. Walker, Jr., Chairman 
Martin H. Moseley, Jr., Vice Chairman 
Betty C. Hill 
Roy Lewis 
Walter Smith 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Charles Jeffrey Liipfert 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Marcia W. Johnson 
County Administrator 
____________ 
COUNTY OFFICIALS 
Deborah W. Hunnicutt 
Probate Judge 
Joe Wilder 
Clerk of Superior Court 
Terry W. Deese 
Sheriff 
W. L. Brown 
Tax Commissioner 
Kerry Rooks 
Coroner 
Laurens C. Lee 
Magistrate 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Peach County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Charles Bartlett, Chairman, Ms. Marcia D. Willis, County Clerk-Treasurer, and Mr. Charles R. Adams, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF 12-13-94 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS of PEACH COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Peach County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 18, 1994, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1000.00, by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 18, 1994 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 13, 1994. 
Passed and adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Peach County this 13th day of December, 1994. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2627 which created a board of commissioners for the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The section number designations of the original act have been retained. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 the words "of roads and revenues" have been stricken from the name of the governing authority. A final judgment and decree entered November 16, 1979, by the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Georgia, Macon Division, in civil action number 76-137-MAC implemented a reapportionment plan which provided for the election of five members of the board of commissioners. A copy of the final judgment and decree is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-26 et seq. 

Section 1. - [Creation; membership.] 
There is hereby created a board of commissioners for Peach County to be composed of five (5) members. One member shall be a resident of the City of Fort Valley, one member shall be a resident of Peach County outside the City of Fort Valley, and one member shall be from the county at large. The aforesaid offices shall be designated as posts numbers 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The members shall be elected by the voters of the entire county. 
Section 2. - [Elections; frequency; officers.] 
The first election for members of the board created in this Act shall be held at the general election in November, 1964. The members elected shall take office January 1, 1965, for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Future elections shall be held every four years at the general election, and future successors shall likewise be elected for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Such successors shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. The members of the board shall elect a chairperson of the board who shall preside at meetings. The board is authorized to elect a vice-chairman in the event such is deemed advisable. The chairperson of the board shall be compensated in the amount of $600.00 per month payable monthly from the funds of Peach County. The members, other than the chairperson, shall be compensated in an amount of $500.00 per month payable monthly from the funds of Peach County. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2979; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 4289; 1989 Ga. Laws, page 4876; Act No. 118(H.B. 930), 4-9-99) 
Editor's note— Act No. 118(H.B. 930) shall become effective on January 1, 2000. 
Section 2A. - [Exception to four-year term.] 
At the general election conducted in 1968, that candidate elected to post No. 3 (county at large) to take office on January 1, 1969, shall be elected for a two-year term of office instead of a four-year term. He shall serve until December 31, 1970. In the general election of 1970, his successor shall be elected to a four-year term of office and every four years thereafter a successor shall be elected in the general election in which the respective term of office shall expire to serve for a four-year term of office. 
(1968 Ga. Laws, page 2473) 
Section 3. - [Meetings.] 
The board shall set a day for holding regular meetings, which shall be held each month. Other meetings shall be held upon call of the chairman or upon a call of a majority of the members of the board. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of business, but no official action shall be taken on any matter without an affirmative vote of at least two (2) members of the board. The chairman shall vote on all matters coming before the board for a vote. 
Section 4. - [Clerk.] 
The board shall employ a clerk of its own choosing who shall be responsible for performing the duties assigned by the board and who shall keep all records of the proceedings of the board and all other records. He shall be compensated not less than $6,500 nor more than $9,500 per annum to be determined by the board. 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 2979) 
Section 5. - [Vacancies.] 
(a)  (1)  Any vacancy in office upon the board which occurs for any reason other than expiration of term shall be filled as follows: 
(A)  If the vacancy occurs during the final six months of a term of office, then within 30 days after such occurrence a majority of remaining members of the board shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy; or 
(B)  If the vacancy occurs at any time prior to the time specified in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, then the election superintendent shall call for a special election to fill such vacancy, which special election shall be held on the earliest date permissible under Code Section 21-2-540 of the O.C.G.A. 
(2)  Any person appointed to fill a vacancy in office pursuant to subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall meet the same eligibility requirements specified for persons who are elected to such office. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of this subsection or elected to fill a vacancy under subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall serve out the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is elected and qualified." 
(1971 Ga. Laws, page 3012; Act of 3-31-2005) 
Section 6. - [Powers.] 
The board is hereby expressly given complete power, authority and control relative to all county matters of Peach County. It is hereby given all the power, authority and duties heretofore vested in the probate court judge when acting as governing authority of the county, and in the one-man office of commissioner of roads and revenues for Peach County. 
Section 6A. - [Authorization to regulate charges for water and sewer services.] 
The governing authority of Peach County is authorized to regulate the rate of charge for water and sewer services provided by any privately owned water and sewer company operating or conducting business within Peach County. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 4377) 
Section 6B. - [Authority to exercise redevelopment and other powers.] 
The county shall have and be authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers authorized or granted counties pursuant to Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.], the `Redevelopment Powers Law,' as now or hereafter amended. These powers shall include, without being limited to, all redevelopment powers, the power to issue tax allocation bonds and incur other obligations without such bonds or obligations constituting debt within the meaning of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution, and the power to enter into contracts with private persons, firms, corporations, and business entities for the period specified in the `Redevelopment Powers Law.' 
(1990 Ga. Laws, page 4589) 
Section 7. - [Audits.] 
The board shall have the books of the board audited annually and make a report thereof by publishing the same in the official organ of the county. 
Section 8. - [County attorney.] 
The board is hereby authorized to employ an attorney at law of said county as county attorney. It shall be his duty to represent the county in litigation and to be legal advisor to said board. He shall be compensated for his services in an amount and in the manner agreed upon between him and the board. 
Section 9. - [Grand jury.] 
The books of the board shall be open to inspection and investigation by the grand jury of the county, and it shall be the duty of the board and the clerk to submit to said grand jury all books and records when requested to do so. 
Section 10. - [Bonds.] 
Each member of the board and the clerk, shall give bond in the amount of $5,000 payable to the clerk of the superior court for and on behalf of the county, conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties as board members and as clerk. Such bonds shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Peach County. Premiums thereon shall be paid from the funds of Peach County. 
Section 11. - [Oaths.] 
Before entering upon the duties of their offices, each member of the board shall take an oath before some officer authorized to administer oaths, to faithfully discharge the duties of their office. 
Section 12. - [Selection of board.] 
In the event that in the referendum election provided for hereinafter, the people vote in favor of having the grand jury of Peach County select the members of the board in lieu of such members being elected by the voters, the first members of the board shall be appointed by the grand jury for the last term of court in 1964. The grand jury shall select one commissioner for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, and one for four (4) years, to take office January 1, 1965. Each successor shall be selected by the grand jury meeting at the last term of court in the year of the expiration of the term. Such successors shall take office on the first day of January immediately after their selection by the grand jury, and all successors to the first members selected by the grand jury and future successors shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are selected and qualified. 
Section 13. - [1939 Act repealed.] 
An Act creating the office of commissioner of Peach County, approved February 10, 1939 (1939 Ga. Laws, page 708), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory Acts are hereby repealed. The office of Commissioner as provided for therein, shall continue in existence, however, through December 31, 1964, but shall stand abolished at that time in the event that this Act is approved in the referendum election provided for hereinafter. 
ARTICLE II. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4482 relating to the filling of vacancies on the board of the county hospital authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Hospital authority, § 2-91 et seq. 

Section 1. - [Authority of act.] 
This Act is passed pursuant to the authority of subsection (c) of Code Section 31-7-72 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72(c)], relating to filling vacancies on boards of hospital authorities in existence prior to March 15, 1964. 
Section 2. - [Filling of vacancies.] 
On and after the date this Act becomes effective, any vacancy in those two membership positions on the Peach County Hospital Authority which were filled for a term beginning November 1, 1990, by Larry Collins and Ray Hollifield shall be filled, whether the vacancy occurs because of expiration of term or any other reason, as follows: 
(1)  The governing authority of Peach County shall submit to the board of the Peach County Hospital Authority a list of three eligible persons for each such membership position. When the membership position will become vacant because of expiration of term, such submission shall be made at least 45 days prior to such expiration. When the membership position has become vacant for any other reason, such submission shall be made at least 30 days after the vacancy occurs; 
(2)  The board at its next regular meeting shall either select one of the persons named in such list or decline to select any of the persons named on the list. If the board declines to select any of the persons named on the list, it shall so notify the county governing authority; 
(3)  Upon receipt of the notification that the board has declined to select any of the persons named in the county governing authority's list, the county governing authority shall submit to the board of the hospital authority a second list of three eligible persons for the vacant membership position, no one of whom was named on the first list; 
(4)  The board at its next regular meeting after receipt of the second list shall either select one of the persons named in the second list or decline to select any of the persons named in the second list. If the board declines to select any of such persons, it shall notify the county governing authority and the presiding judge of the Civil Division of the Superior Court of Peach County; and 
(5)  Upon receipt of the notification that the board has declined to select any of the persons named in the second list, the presiding judge of the Civil Division of the Superior Court of Peach County shall select one of the six names previously submitted to the board unless, for good cause, that judge makes another selection of a person eligible for membership on the board. 
Section 3. - [Appointment; terms.] 
A person appointed pursuant to Section 2 of this Act to fill a vacancy resulting from expiration of term shall take office immediately following the expiration of term and shall serve for a term of office of the same length as the terms of the members of the board who are not appointed pursuant to this Act and until such person's successor is appointed and qualified. A person appointed pursuant to Section 2 of this Act to fill an unexpired term shall be appointed to fill out such unexpired term and until that person's successor is appointed and qualified. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4663 which created and established the Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-51 et seq. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
Section 2. - Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(a)  [ Creation. ] There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the "Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  [ Composition; terms; compensation; powers. ] The authority shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed by the governing authority of Peach County. The terms of the initial members of the authority shall be staggered as follows: one member to serve for one year; one member to serve for two years; one member to serve for three years; one member to serve for four years; and one member to serve for five years. Successors to the initial members of the authority shall serve for terms of five years. The terms of all members shall begin on July 1 and shall run until June 30 of the year of expiration and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial members in the month of June immediately preceding the expiration of a member's term of office. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. As of July 1, 1997, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. The members of the authority shall be entitled to reimbursement for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall have the power to establish bylaws and to promulgate and adopt rules and regulations necessary or desirable for the management and operation of the authority. 
[That Representatives Ray and James and Senator Hooks be and they are hereby requested to secure the passage of local legislation at the 1997 Session of the General Assembly to create a water and sewer district for Peach County and to provide for the appointment of members to the Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority on or after April 1, 1997.] 
Editor's note— Resolution of 1-14-1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, at the discretion of the editor has been added as R.L. Art. III, § 2(b)1. See also the Related Laws Comparative Table. 
(c)  [ Eligibility for appointment. ] To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age and a resident of Peach County for at least one year prior to the date of his appointment and shall not have been convicted of a felony. 
(d)  [ Election of officers; terms. ] The members of the authority shall in July of each year elect one of their number as chairman. Also, the members of the authority shall elect one of their number as vice chairman, shall elect one of their number as secretary, and may also elect one of their number as treasurer. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified. The chairman of the authority shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution. 
(e)  [ Quorum. ] Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. 
(f)  [ Vacancy; cause; filling. ] In the event of a vacancy by reason of death, disqualification, resignation, or other reason, the governing body of Peach County shall select and appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term of the member whose position has been vacated. A vacancy shall exist in the office of any member of the authority who is convicted of a felony or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who moves his residence from the county; who is convicted of any act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of his duties as a member of the authority; or who fails to attend any regular or special meeting of the authority for a period of three months without an excuse approved by a resolution of the authority. 
(g)  [ Meetings. ] All meetings of the authority, regular or special, shall be open to the public. The authority may hold public hearings on its own initiative or at the request of residents of Peach County or residents of any area affected by the actions of the authority. 
(h)  [ Financial interest, profit or benefit prohibited. ] No member or employee of the authority shall have directly or indirectly any financial interest, profit, or benefit in any contract, work, or business of the authority nor in the sale, lease, or purchase of any property to or from the authority. 
(Res. of 1-14-1997; Act of 3-3-1997) 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  Authority means the Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority created by this Act. 
(2)  Cost of the project means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized; the cost of the acquisition or construction of any project; the cost of placing any project in operation; and the cost of condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)  Project shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water, and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Peach County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking. The word "project" shall also mean and include the acquisition, construction, and equipping of all necessary and usual facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter of every type, including both individual and industrial, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds, and lagoons, within and without the territorial boundaries of Peach County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate sewerage system deemed by the authority necessary for the efficient operation of a sanitary and storm sewer system. Said water facilities and said sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time into a water and sewerage system as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(4)  Revenue bonds and bonds mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended, known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(5)  Any project shall be deemed self-liquidating if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 4. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of, or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and, in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed, erected, or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relating to the furnishing of water and related services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions or for the purchase of water by the authority therefrom for a term not exceeding 50 years, and also to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the gathering of waste matter and the treatment of waste matter and sewage by the authority for such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions or by such municipal corporations, counties, or political subdivisions for the authority. Likewise, without limiting the generality of the above and foregoing, the same authority above granted to municipal corporations, counties, political subdivisions, and to the authority relative to entering into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings is authorized between the authority and private corporations, both within and without the State of Georgia, and between the authority and public bodies, including counties and cities outside the State of Georgia; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(8)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make shortterm loans and approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of such indebtedness, provided no such power is in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; and 
(11)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Section 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
Section 6. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
Section 7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Section 8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. Such bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Section 9. - Same; sale; price; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Section 10. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 11. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 12. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Section 13. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Peach County nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county; but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Section 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for the protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 16. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, including funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 18. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 19. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the "Revenue Bond Law," Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same and the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Peach County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
Section 20. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Peach County, Georgia; and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 21. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. No other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 22. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 23. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of the same to the various municipalities and citizens in Peach County and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein, and further for the general purpose of gathering and treatment of waste, both individual and industrial; but such general purpose shall not restrict the authority from selling and delivering water directly to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist water distribution systems or furnishing sewer facilities to such customers and areas where neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. 
The authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell its products and services to customers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states, providing the laws of the adjoining states do not prohibit or tax said activity. 
The authority shall not have the authority to construct water lines for the distribution of water directly to customers within any municipality without first obtaining the express written consent of the appropriate governing body of said municipality and, likewise, the authority shall not have the authority to construct sewer lines for the collection of waste and sewage directly to customers within any municipality without first obtaining the express written consent of the appropriate governing body of said municipality. 
Section 24. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise the same from time to time and to collect fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Section 25. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed or acquired under the provisions of this Act, including the basis upon which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
Section 26. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Peach County; and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Peach County when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
Section 27. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Section 28. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 29. - Effect on other governments. 
This Act shall not and does not in any way take from Peach County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the "Revenue Bond Law," Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. 
Section 30. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1988 Ga. Laws, page 4598 which provides an exemption from ad valorem taxation for certain homesteads and residents as defined in such act. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Taxation, ch. 42. 

Section 1. - [Eligibility; filing of affidavit; determination of entitlement; notice of ineligibility.] 
The homestead, but not to exceed $12,000.00 of the value thereof, of each resident of the Peach County school district who is 62 years of age or over and who does not have a gross income from all sources, including the income from all sources of all members of the family residing within said homestead, exceeding $14,000.00 per annum, shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxation for educational purposes levied for and in behalf of such school system including taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. No such exemption shall be granted unless an affidavit of the owner of the homestead is filed with the tax commissioner of Peach County giving his age, the amount of income which he received for the immediately preceding calendar year, the income which the members of his family residing within the homestead received for such period, and such other additional information relative to receiving the benefits of the exemption granted by this section as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to said exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. The exemption granted to the homestead within this section shall extend to and shall apply to those properties, the legal title to which is vested in one or more title holders, if actually occupied by one or more such owners as a residence, and one or more such title holders possesses the qualifications provided for in this section. In such instances, such exemptions shall be granted to such properties, if claimed in the manner provided in this section by one or more of the owners actually residing on such property. Such exemptions shall also extend to those homesteads, the title to which is vested in an administrator, executor, or trustee, if one or more of the heirs or cestui que uses residing on such property shall possess the qualifications provided for in this section and shall claim the exemptions granted by this section in the manner provided in this section. It shall be the duty of any person who claims an exemption under this section to notify the tax commissioner in the event such person becomes ineligible for the exemption granted in this section. The exemption provided for in this section shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1988. 
Section 2. - [Exemption in lieu of, not in addition to state homestead exemption.] 
(a)  The exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the homestead exemption granted by Code Section 48-5-52 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-5-52], relating to exemption from ad valorem taxation for educational purposes of homesteads of qualified individuals 62 years of age or older. 
(b)  If the amount of said exemption granted by the general provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state is increased above the amount of the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act, then such increased exemption shall apply rather than the exemption granted by Section 1 of this Act. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Peach County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the board of commissioners of Peach County, Georgia. 
Chairman, other officers and officials. Whenever the word "chairman" is used it shall mean the chairman of the board of commissioners of Peach County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Peach County. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Peach County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The letters "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioners' office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Peach County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week, of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Peach County, as follows:" 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Peach County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Peach County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration of the flood damage prevention ordinance, § 27-60 et seq.; county marshal, § 29-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 1; county officers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 1, par. 3; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 1; supplementary powers, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which county commission has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Payment of attorney's fees. 
The county shall pay no attorney's fees or reimburse any person for the payment of attorney's fees for legal representation of any employee of the county, elected officials of the county, or appointed officials of the county, or any other person other than for legal representation by the county attorney as designated by the board of commissioners or members of its office or staff; or by any attorney having been properly appointed by the court or the indigent defense coordinator's office for the representation of indigent criminal defendants; or as ordered by a court having competent jurisdiction to order the payment of attorney's fees by the county; unless, prior to the employment of any other attorney by any employee, elected officials or appointed officials, or other person the board of commissioners shall have agreed to pay or reimburse for the payment of such attorney's fees and shall have approved the basis by which such fee would be charged or the rate at which such fee would be charged. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88) 
Sec. 2-2. - Coverage of firefighters. 
County volunteer firefighters shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund while performing their duties as volunteer firefighters. 
Secs. 2-3—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 5-14-96, §§ 1-01—1-20, adopted May 14, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superceding the provisions of former ch. 2, art. II relative to the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Related laws reference— Board of commissioners, art. I. 

Sec. 2-26. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of 50-14-1 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-01) 
Sec. 2-27. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the Commissioner Chambers located at 213 Person Street or in such larger room as the chairman may determine. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-14) 
Sec. 2-28. - Called meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
Called meetings may be scheduled by the chairman or at the request of two commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other called meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, and to each member of the county governing authority. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-15) 
Sec. 2-29. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24-hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting, and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-16) 
Sec. 2-30. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners at the direction of the chairman. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may be delayed only until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned, or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-17) 
Sec. 2-31. - Chairman. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairman must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairman shall be impartial and shall conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-05) 
Sec. 2-32. - Vice-chairman. 
The board shall select a vice-chairman from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairman shall fulfill the duties of the chairman if the chairman is not in attendance. If the chairman and vice-chairman are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the chairman or vice-chairman is present at the meeting. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-06) 
Sec. 2-33. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-12) 
Sec. 2-34. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairman to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairman if he or she believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within thirty minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairman with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-02) 
Sec. 2-35. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of any motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-03) 
Sec. 2-36. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner may abstain from voting on any motion. The commissioner shall explain for the record his or her decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-04) 
Sec. 2-37. - Decorum. 
All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-10) 
Sec. 2-38. - Agenda. 
The county administrator, with the advice of the chairman and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board meeting. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following regular monthly meeting scheduled for the second Tuesday of each month. To be considered, this request must be submitted to the county administrator no later than 3:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding the first Tuesday of each month. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-07; Ord. of 6-9-09) 
Sec. 2-39. - Minutes. 
The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes shall serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed formation may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairman and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-08) 
Sec. 2-40. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
I.  Call to Order 
II.  Consent Agenda 
III.  Agenda 
IV.  Minutes 
V.  Announcements and Updates 
VI.  Appearances 
VII.  Old Business 
VIII.  New Business 
IX.  Executive Session (if needed) 
X.  Adjournment 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-09; Ord. of 6-9-09) 
Sec. 2-41. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county administrator at least three business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments shall require a 2/3 vote of the board to be adopted. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-13) 
Sec. 2-42. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a 2/3 vote of the board. Rules governing quorum (section 2-34), voting methods and requirements (sections 2-35 and 2-36), the notification to commissioners of meetings (sections 2-29 and 2-30) and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-18) 
Sec. 2-43. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The sixth agenda item of the regular monthly meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the board must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county administrator no later than 3:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding the first Tuesday of each month in order to be considered for placement on the agenda. Individuals who are placed on the agenda will be allotted five minutes each to make comments, and the comments must be limited to the designated topic. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the board. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may speak only once. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the board. Anyone wishing to speak at an any board meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the board. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
(4)  Public hearings. The Board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-11; Ord. of 6-9-09) 
Sec. 2-44. - Committees. 
The chairman, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board, but no committee shall be empowered to make a final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of the board. The chairman shall be an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-19) 
Sec. 2-45. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Res. of 5-14-96, § 1-20) 
Secs. 2-46—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Related laws reference— Water and sewerage authority, art. III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-51—2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The Peach County Industrial Development Authority created pursuant to 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2695 is no longer active. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Declaration of necessity. 
There is hereby determined and declared to be a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority, as more fully described and defined in the development authority law, to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry. 
(Res. of 12-14-76) 
Sec. 2-62. - Creation; authority. 
There is hereby activated in the county the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of Peach County which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 12-14-76) 
Sec. 2-63. - Terms of directors. 
Directors shall serve in such capacity for six years. If at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Res. of 12-14-76) 
Sec. 2-64. - Duties and powers. 
The elected board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 12-14-76) 
Sec. 2-65. - Actions of board of commissioners not to affect county development authority. 
Action taken by the board of commissioners, as specified in this division, is not intended in any way to affect the Peach County Development Authority, including, without limitations, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Res. of 12-14-76) 
Secs. 2-66—2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MIDDLE GEORGIA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An official copy of the agreement referred to in this division is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The participants are identified in such agreement as Doolg County, Macon County, and Peach County. 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 38. 

Sec. 2-76. - Activation of authority. 
The county, after diligent study and review, hereby joins with the other participants in finding and declaring that there is a need for an authority to function in the area of solid waste management. In conjunction with the other participants, the county hereby activates the Middle Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Authority, referred to in this division as "the authority," a public corporation created as an institution of purely public charity, to perform an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this division and the Regional Solid Waste Management Authority Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq. 
(Res. of 8-30-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-77. - Authorization of agreement among participants. 
Under the authority of Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 3, par. 1, the execution, delivery and performance by the county of an agreement, dated July 27, 1993, between and among the county and each of the participants and the authority is hereby authorized. The execution of the agreement by the chairman of the board of commissioners, which is hereby authorized, shall be conclusive evidence of such approval. The agreement shall provide for the activation of the authority and the relationship between and among the participants, including the county, and establish on a preliminary basis the powers and duties of the authority relating to research, study, and planning for projects for the management of solid waste on behalf of the participants. The agreement shall only become effective upon its execution by two counties pursuant to the authorization of such execution through duly adopted resolutions. 
(Res. of 8-30-93, § 3) 
Sec. 2-78. - Other actions. 
In order to carry out the formation and activation of the authority, the chairman of the board of commissioners is further authorized to take any and all further action and execute and deliver any and all other documents that may be necessary or desirable in the execution, delivery, performance, or approval of the agreement and in order to carry out and effectuate fully the purposes thereof and hereof. 
(Res. of 8-30-93, § 4) 
Secs. 2-79—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Related laws reference— Hospital authority, art. II. 
State Law reference— Creation of hospital authority in each county and municipality, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72. 

Sec. 2-91. - Declaration of need. 
(a)  It is hereby determined and declared that there is a need for a hospital authority to function in the county. 
(b)  Such hospital authority is hereby established and created in accordance with the Hospital Authorities Law as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq. 
(c)  Such hospital authority shall be known as the Hospital Authority of Peach County, referred to in this division as the "hospital authority." 
(Res. of 9-24-49, § 1) 
Sec. 2-92. - Exercise of powers. 
The hospital authority is authorized to exercise the powers contained in the Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq., with respect to the area embraced within the county. 
(Res. of 9-24-49, § 2) 
Sec. 2-93. - Board of trustees. 
The board of trustees for the hospital authority shall consist of nine citizens of the county, who shall have all the rights, powers, privileges and authority, and be subject to the duties as provided by the Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq. In addition, there shall be one honorary member of the board of trustees, who shall be the chief of staff of the Peach County Hospital or his designate. Such honorary member shall not be entitled to vote on any matter coming before the board of trustees, shall be disregarded in determining whether a quorum exists at any meeting and shall not otherwise be deemed a member of the board of trustees for any purpose, but shall be entitled to receive notice of and attend all meetings of the board of trustees. 
(Res. of 9-24-49, § 3; Res. of 5-13-75, § 1; Res. of 5-10-77, § 1) 
Sec. 2-94. - Ex officio members. 
The board of trustees of the hospital authority shall consist of two ex officio members and seven appointive or elective members. 
(Res. of 9-24-49, § 4; Res. of 5-13-75, § 2; Res. of 5-10-77, § 2) 
Sec. 2-95. - Designation of chairman. 
The two ex officio members of the hospital authority shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of the county or his designate from the board of commissioners of the county and the mayor of the City of Fort Valley or his designate from the city council of the City of Fort Valley. Each of the ex officio members and/or designates shall have the same rights, powers, privileges and authority, including voting privileges, as the appointive or elective members. 
(Res. of 9-24-49, § 5; Res. of 5-13-75, § 3; Res. of 5-10-77, § 3) 
Secs. 2-96—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RECREATION COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Act. No. 199, adopted on April 13, 2007 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, at the discretion of the editor these provisions have been included as §§ 2-100.8—2-100.25. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-100.1. - Established. 
Pursuant to the provisions of 1946 Ga. Laws, page 152, as amended, there is hereby established a recreation commission to be known as the Fort Valley-Byron-Peach County Recreation Commission, referred to in this division as the "recreation commission." 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 1) 
Sec. 2-100.2. - Membership. 
The recreation commission shall consist of seven persons serving without pay, three of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Fort Valley, three of whom shall be appointed by the chairman and the board of commissioners of the county and one of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the City of Byron. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 2) 
Sec. 2-100.3. - Terms; vacancies. 
The term of office for members of the recreation commission shall be five years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members of the commission first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be filled by another appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 3) 
Sec. 2-100.4. - Officers; adoption of bylaws. 
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their members president and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the appointive bodies, for the proper conduct of recreation for such cities and county. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 4) 
Sec. 2-100.5. - Powers and duties. 
The recreation commission shall have all the powers and perform all duties designated by 1946 Ga. Laws, page 152, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 5) 
Sec. 2-100.6. - Budget; gifts and bequests. 
The recreation commission shall submit an annual budget to the governing authorities of the City of Fort Valley, the county and the City of Byron for approval. The commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or a donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 6) 
Sec. 2-100.7. - Reports. 
The recreation commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the governing boards and such other reports as from time to time may be required. 
(Ord. of 9-27-76, § 7) 
Sec. 2-100.8. - Creation of board. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. Section 21-2-40, there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Peach County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the judge of the probate court of Peach County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," and the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the board of registrars of Peach County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.9. - Terms. 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act, and the term "board" means the Board of Elections and Registration of Peach County, "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Peach County, and "county" means Peach County. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.10. - The board. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the governing authority of Peach County. 
(c)  One member of the board shall be selected by the county executive committee of the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. 
(d)  One member of the board shall be selected by the county executive committee of the political party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. 
(e)  One member shall be selected by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Peach County. 
(f)  All appointments to the board shall be promptly certified by the appointing authority to the clerk of the Superior Court of Peach County. 
(g)  The initial appointees to the board shall take office on October 1, 2007. The two members appointed by the governing authority of Peach County and the member selected by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Peach County shall serve terms beginning on October 1, 2007, and ending on September 30, 2011, and until his or her respective successor is duly appointed and qualified. Successors to each such member shall thereafter be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority to serve a term of office of four years beginning October 1, 2011, and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The two appointees of the political parties shall serve a term beginning on October 1, 2007, and ending on September 30, 2009, and until his or her respective successor is duly appointed and qualified. Successors to such members shall thereafter be appointed by the appropriate appointing authority to serve a term of office of four years beginning October 1, 2009, and until their respective successors are duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed to serve four year terms of office and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.11. - Election supervisor. 
The Peach County Board of Commissioners, which will consider the recommendation of the Board of Elections and Registration of Peach County, shall be authorized to appoint a person to serve as the election supervisor of Peach County. The Peach County Board of Commissioners shall set the salary and employment status of the election supervisor, said salary to be payable from county funds. If appointed, the election supervisor shall generally direct and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The election supervisor shall not be a member of the board. The election supervisor shall be supervised by the board and shall be deemed to be an at-will employee of the Board of Commissioners of Peach County and shall be subject to removal from office, with or without cause, by the Board of Commissioners of Peach County. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.12. - Members of the board. 
Each member of the board shall: 
(1)  Be eligible to be reappointed to succeed such member; 
(2)  Have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the governing authority of Peach County and to the clerk of the Superior Court of Peach County; 
(3)  Serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified; and 
(4)  Be subject to removal from the board by the chief judge of the Superior Court of Peach County at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.13. - Appointing authority. 
(a)  The appointing authority shall certify the appointment of each member of the board by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the Superior Court of Peach County no later than 30 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. 
(b)  The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.14. - Vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointing authority which is required under section 2-100.10 of this Act to make the appointment to the office upon the expiration of the term shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in section 2-100.10 of this Act. If the vacancy in office is not filled within 60 days after it occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the governing authority of Peach County. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
(a)  The first members of the board under this Act shall be appointed as provided in this Act to take office on October 1, 2007. The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the Superior Court of Peach County. 
(b)  Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.15. - Terms of elective public office. 
(a)  No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(b)  Members of the board must be residents of Peach County and must have been registered voters in Peach County for a period of at least one year prior to the date of their appointment to the board. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.16. - Joint primaries. 
(a)  Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require or prohibit joint primaries or to require or prohibit the commissioners or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required by law. 
(b)  The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Peach County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.17. - Expending public funds. 
With the approval of the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of preparing and distributing material solely to inform and instruct electors of the county adequately with regard to elections. No material distributed by the board shall contain or express, in any manner or form, any commentary or expression of opinion or request for support with respect to any political issue or matter of political concern. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.18. - Management of the board's affairs. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, elect its officers from among its members, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.19. - Duties of the board. 
(a)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold meetings at the county courthouse or at the place of meeting of the commissioners. Any specially called meetings held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the board shall be held only after notification of the time and place or the holding of such special meeting has been communicated in writing to provide public notice of the meeting as required by law. All meetings of whatever kind of the board shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. 
(b)  The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review pursuant to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.20. - Compensation of the members of the board. 
(a)  Compensation for the members of the board shall be fixed by the commissioners. 
(b)  All amounts payable under this section shall be paid from the funds of Peach County. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.21. - Clerical assistants of the board. 
(a)  The board may request additional clerical assistants as needed to carry out efficiently the duties and functions of the board on either an independent contract basis or as county employees, to be determined by the commissioners. The commissioners shall be responsible for determining the pay and salary of all clerical assistants of the board. Any such assistants shall be hired by the commissioners, which shall consider the recommendation of the board, and such clerical assistants shall be at-will employees of the commissioners. 
(b)  The commissioners shall provide suitable offices and equipment and funding sufficient to employ the staff and other employees as may be necessary. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.22. - Poll workers. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.23. - Preclearance. 
The commissioners shall cause, through its legal counsel, this Act to be submitted for preclearance under Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, within 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.24. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective on October 1, 2007. Upon this Act becoming fully effective, the current superintendent of elections of Peach County the judge of the probate court of Peach County, and the existing board of registrars of Peach County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. Nothing contained herein is intended to prevent the appointment of members of the board, the appointment of an election supervisor, the hiring of clerical staff, or any necessary training for the members of the board, the election supervisor and clerical assistants prior to October 1, 2007. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-100.25. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(Act of 4-13-2007) 
Secs. 2-100.26—2-100.126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of municipal governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-111. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners to establish regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for the purchase of materials and services necessary for the effective operations of the county government and to ensure the administration of such system is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § I; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-112. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all primary departments and agencies receiving appropriations from the board of commissioners and to other agencies as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § II) 
Sec. 2-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Account number means the number assigned to a specific account title in a classification of accounts. For the county, this number includes a three-digit fund designation, a five-digit department designation, and a six-digit object/expenditure designation. 
Accounting system means all the records, formal and informal, together with the procedures that have to do with assembling the financial operations and condition of a governmental unit. 
Accounts payable means liabilities on open account owing to private persons, firms, or corporations, or to governmental units. 
Acknowledgement means a form used by a vendor to inform a purchaser that his order has been received. It generally implies vendor's acceptance. 
Alternate bids means the amount stated in the bid or proposal to be added to or deducted from the amount of the base bid or base proposal if the corresponding change in project scope or alternate materials or methods of construction is accepted. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the board of commissioners to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
As is means an expression signifying that goods offered for sale are without warranty or guarantee. The purchaser has no recourse on the vendor for the quality or condition of the goods. 
Back order means the undelivered part of a previous order, which the vendor re-enters for shipment at a later date. 
Base bid or base proposal means the amount of money stated in the bid or proposal as the sum for which the bidder or proposer offers to perform the work. 
Bid means a price offer by a prospective purchaser, for example, an auction bid or a quotation given, usually in competition with other vendors, in response to an intending buyer's request. 
Bid bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties for the faithful acceptance of the contract payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of Peach County for which the contract is awarded. 
Blanket purchases means an open purchase order to a particular vendor covering certain materials and supplies for a stated period of time. 
Brand name means an arbitrarily adopted name that is given by a manufacturer or merchant to an article or service to distinguish it as produced or sold by him and that may be used and protected as a trademark. 
Budget amendment means a change in the overall appropriation granted by the board of commissioners to a particular government department (user agency). This requires approval by the board of commissioners. 
Budget transfer means moving a portion of a line item appropriation to another line item within a department's total budget appropriation. The total budget appropriation for that department does not change. This requires approval by the board of commissioners' county clerk. 
Cash in advance means payment is to accompany purchaser's order. 
Change order means an alteration, addition, or deduction from the original scope of work as defined by the contract documents to address changes or unforeseen conditions necessary for project completion. 
Competitive sealed bidding means a method of soliciting bids, generally received in a sealed envelope to protect the confidentiality of the bid until a specified time and place for opening, whereby the award is based upon the lowest responsive, responsible bid in conformance with bidding rules and specifications. 
Competitive sealed proposals means a method of soliciting proposals, generally received in a sealed envelope to protect the confidentiality of the bid until a specified time and place for opening, whereby the award is based upon criteria identified in a request for proposals in conformance with bidding rules and specifications. 
Confirming order (confirmation) means a purchase order listing the goods or services and terms of an order originally placed orally. 
Contract means an oral or written, legally binding mutual agreement between two competent parties. An accepted purchase order becomes a contract. 
Date needed means the date the department needs the material or service. A definite date must be given since this may affect the price. 
Delivery means the transfer of possession. In shipping, it occurs when the carrier submits the bill of lading or title to the goods to the recipient. 
Delivery schedule means the agreed time or rate of future deliveries of purchased goods or services. 
Depreciation means decrease in value of a capital asset because of use, deterioration, inadequacy, or obsolescence. 
Discount means an amount deducted from the selling price by the vendor. It is generally applied when a purchaser meets stipulations that reduce the cost of the goods, for example: quantity discounts. 
Emergency means any situation resulting in imminent danger to the public health or safety or the loss of an essential governmental service. 
Emergency purchase means when a purchase is made due to conditions that exist that present a threat to the safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the county and whenever such requirements would cause an undue delay in the delivery of essential county services under such conditions. 
Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts, or salary commitments, which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
Equipment means physical property of a more or less permanent nature, other than land, buildings, or improvements to land or buildings, ordinarily useful in carrying on operations. Examples are machinery, tools, trucks, cars, furniture, and furnishings. 
Expedite means to execute promptly or to accelerate the process or progress of. 
Inspection means the act of examining and scrutinizing something to determine if a particular standard is met. The inspection of a delivery of goods or services should determine the condition, quality, quantity, acceptability, and completeness of the goods or services received. 
Inventory means a stock of goods or an itemized list of a stock of goods on hand at a particular time. When ascertained by a physical count of the items, it is a physical inventory. When determined from records maintained for routine business activities, it is a book inventory. 
Invitation to bid means a request made by a purchaser to prospective suppliers for their competitive price quotations on goods or services. 
Invoice means a bill sent to a buyer for payment. It shows quantity, price, and nature of goods or services delivered. 
Lead time means the period of time between that of ordering to the date of delivery that a buyer must reasonably grant the vendor to prepare goods for shipment. 
Payment bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties payable to Peach County for which the work is to be done and intended for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. 
Performance bond means a bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify Peach County for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be payable to, in favor of, and for the protection of Peach County for which the work is to be done. 
Petty cash means a sum of money, in the form of currency, set aside and controlled for the purpose of making immediate reimbursement payments of comparatively small amounts for authorized purchases. 
Price schedule means a list of prices applying to varying quantities or kinds of goods. 
Procurement means to get possession of or to obtain by particular care and effort. 
Public works construction means the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. Such term does not include the routine operation, repair, or maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property. 
Purchase means to acquire property or services for a price. 
Purchase order means a purchaser's formal written offer to a vendor containing all terms and conditions of a proposed transaction. The purchase order authorizes a vendor to deliver specified merchandise and to make a charge therefore. 
Purchase order number means a unique number assigned to a purchase order for recording and tracking all transactions related to that order. 
Purchase requisition means a formal request made to purchasing by a user agency to procure goods or services from vendors. 
Quotation means a statement of price, terms of sale, and description of goods or services offered by a vendor to a prospective purchaser; a bid. When given in response to an inquiry, it is generally considered a sales proposal. It also means the stating of the current price of a commodity. 
Rebate means a sum of money returned by a vendor to a purchaser in consideration of the purchase of a specified quantity or value of goods usually within a stated interval. 
Receiving report means a document used by a department to inform others in the company of the receipt of purchased goods. For the county, the receiving report is a copy of the purchase order with the signature of the authorized department official showing completeness and acceptability of the order. 
Requisition number means an identification number for tracking requisitions for purchase. 
Responsible bidder (responsible offeror) means a person or entity that has the capability in all respects to perform fully and reliably the contract requirements. 
Responsive bidder (responsive offeror) means a person or entity that has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Restricted purchase order means an official government purchase order, which receives its authority by a department head's signature and is valid only for purchases of less than $500.00. 
Sales tax means a tax levied upon a vendor's sale. The county is exempt from paying sales tax. 
Sample means a small portion of goods taken as a specimen of quality. 
Scope of project means the work required by the original contract documents and any subsequent change orders required or appropriate to accomplish the intent of the project as described in the bid documents. 
Scope of work means the work that is required by the contract documents. 
Sealed bid. See "Competitive sealed bidding." 
Seller's lien means the right of a seller to retain possession of goods until payment is received except where goods are sold on credit. 
Sole source means those procurements made pursuant to a written determination by the county that there is only one source for the required supply, service, or construction item due to specific scientific technology or extraordinary specifications and circumstances. 
Specifications means a comprehensive and accurate statement of the technical and procedural requirements of requested goods or services. Specifications should also include any procedures to be followed to ascertain if the requirements are met. 
Statement of account means a list, generally prepared by the vendor, detailing the transactions between vendor and purchaser for a stated period of time, usually a month, and concluding with the open or unpaid balance. 
Stock means the supply of goods maintained on hand to satisfy anticipated demand. 
Subcontractor means a party contracting with a prime contractor to perform all or any part of the latter's contract. 
Terms of payment means the method of payment agreed upon in a sales contract. The three basic terms are cash, open account, and secured account. 
Trade name. See "Brand name." 
Unit means order unit, such as feet, dozen, gallon, etc. 
Used means not new or secondhand. 
Vendor number means a number assigned to a particular vendor that references all of that vendor's information in the county government's computerized financial system. 
Voucher means a written certification, usually testifying that services have been performed or goods purchased and authorizing payment to be made to the vendor. 
Warranty means a written guarantee of the integrity of a product and of the maker's responsibility for the repair or replacement of defective parts. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Mo. of 4-6-2010; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-114. - Purchasing manager. 
The purchasing manager is assigned the general duties and responsibilities of supervising and administering the provisions of this division. The purchasing manager's authority, responsibilities, and duties are, as follows: 
(1)  To carry out the policies, regulations, and procedures for purchasing all goods and services required by the user agencies of the county pursuant to the provisions of this division; and other directives of the board of commissioners not in conflict with this division. 
(2)  To obtain the highest quality of goods and services for the most economical costs which will provide the most effective operations of the county. 
(3)  To maintain up-to-date files of all vendors known to the board of commissioners who are reputable and responsible vendors of goods and services. 
(4)  To ensure that all purchases are in compliance with the county's budgeting and accounting policies and procedures. 
(5)  To make requests to the board of commissioners for declarations of ineligibility on any vendor that misrepresents or defaults on any quotation, bid, or purchase agreement with the county and disqualifying such vendor from doing further business with the county for a specified period of time. 
(6)  To promulgate policies and procedures to administer and carry out the provisions of this division or other policies established by the county pertaining to county governmental purchases. 
(7)  To ensure that all standards and specifications are reasonable, nonrestrictive when possible, and certain to promote open competition among vendors. 
(8)  To provide for a uniform purchasing manual which shall include rules and regulations pertaining to the purchasing of goods and services for Peach County and a step-by-step description of the proper procedures for purchasing those goods and services. The purchasing manual, as approved by the board of commissioners, shall be considered a part of this division by reference and shall have the same force and effect as this division. 
(9)  To review special needs of any user agency to identify noncompetitive types and kinds of goods and services and to exempt such items from certain purchasing procedures. Any such exemption shall include documentation of the reasons for the exemption. 
(10)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing manager to report any actual or suspected misuse of county property, supplies, or services to the board of commissioners. 
(11)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing manager to maintain a record and description, as a public record, of all requisitions, competitive bids and quotations, purchase orders, receiving reports, bid rejections, and other pertinent purchasing documentation, in accordance with the regulations and procedures prescribed in the purchasing manual. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § III; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-115. - User agency. 
A user agency is any department, division, agency, bureau, commission, board, authority, or other unit of the county government using goods and services to carry out the duties and responsibilities of such functions and for which financial appropriations have been made by the board of commissioners. The user agency's authority, responsibilities, and duties are, as follows: 
(1)  To conduct the purchasing function within the user agency pursuant to the provisions of this division and the attached purchasing manual, to communicate these policies and procedures to user agency vendors when necessary, and to refer policy and procedure questions to the purchasing manager for resolution. 
(2)  To initiate the purchasing process for requested goods or services by the completion and submission of a requisition for purchase through the automated purchasing system as prescribed in the attached purchasing manual. 
(3)  To submit requests for purchases of goods and services, especially inventory replacement, in a timely manner to facilitate meeting the terms of this division and to hold emergency purchases to a minimum. 
(4)  To act responsibly and for the ultimate good of the county when utilizing the procedures for making emergency purchases and to complete and submit all paperwork and enter all required information in the automated purchasing system regarding the emergency purchase as specified in the attached purchasing manual. 
(5)  To provide suggested vendors and technical information and advice on goods and services requested. 
(6)  To keep an open file for purchase orders pending delivery of goods to the user agency, to inspect any shipments for accuracy and quality of condition, and to report the delivery to purchasing as per the procedures specified in the purchasing manual. 
(7)  The user agency will be ultimately responsible to the board of commissioners as to fund availability. 
(8)  To provide clear and valid written justification for any purchases requested from sole source vendors or where specifications are restricted as to brand name or features. 
(9)  To make recommendations for bid awards where quality and service are involved in addition to price, ensuring that the best interest of the county is served. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § IV; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-116. - Award of contracts. 
(a)  The purchasing manager shall be authorized to award a contract for the purchase of goods and services to the most economical, best, and most responsible bidder or vendor when approved in the budget or approved project resolution up to $4,999.99. The approval of the board of commissioners shall be required before the award of a contract or purchase in excess of $5,000.00 is made. 
(b)  In addition to price, the board of commissioners and/or the purchasing manager shall consider the following: 
(1)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts of services or as determined from references; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; 
(10)  Whether the vendor is in default with the county as per section 2-127. 
(c)  Conflict of Interest. 
(1)  Neither the purchasing manager nor any employee, officer, agent, immediate family member, or board member of the county shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a purchase or contract if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Such a conflict would arise when the purchasing manager, employee, officer, agent, immediate family member or board member has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for the award. 
(2)  Any employee, appointed officer, or elected officer of the county who is also an owner, employee, or any person who gains any form of financial benefit from any private company that engages in the sale of real or personal property to the county shall follow all purchasing and sealed bid requirements as directed by the county and shall make a full declaration of his or her status as an owner, employee, or any person who gains any form of financial benefit from any private company that engages in the sale of real or person property to the county. If the status of the employee, appointed officer, or elected officer of the county should change during the course of employment, appointment, or term, said employee, appointed officer, or elected officer shall file an updated declaration with the county purchasing manager within 15 days of said change of status. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § V; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-117. - Rejection of bids or quotations. 
The board of commissioners and/or the purchasing manager, as determined by the authority to award bids or quotations for contracts and/or purchases, shall be authorized to reject any or all bids, in whole or in part, when it is determined that the terms, conditions, or specifications received are not in compliance with those in the county bid solicitation. In such an event, the board of commissioners and/or the purchasing manager shall document the circumstances of such rejection and reissue the solicitation as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § VI; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-118. - Purchases of less than $2,500.00. 
Any supply, material, or contractual service which has an estimated cost of less than $2,500.00 may be purchased from any approved vendor recommended by the user agency or, in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved vendor selected by the purchasing manager. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the user agency. Although multiple quotes are not required for purchases at this level, receiving multiple quotes as time allows is suggested for receiving the greatest cost savings for county government. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § VII; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-119. - Competitive quotations. 
(a)  Competitive quotations under $5,000.00. Any supply, material, or contractual service to be purchased by the county which has an estimated cost of not less than $2,500.00 but not more than $4,999.99 shall be purchased on the open market, without regard for formal advertising. Upon the receipt of documented written or oral price quotations from at least three reputable vendors for such item or service if three such vendors exist, the purchasing manager shall award the contract. The purchasing manager shall be authorized to reject any or all bids or quotations as per section 2-117. 
(b)  Competitive quotations under $10,000.00. Any supply, material, or contractual service to be purchased by the county which has an estimated cost of not less than $5,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 shall be purchased on the open market, without regard for formal advertising. Upon receipt of documented written price quotations from at least three reputable vendors if three such vendors exist, the board of commissioners shall award the contract. The board of commissioners will be authorized to reject any or all bids or quotations as per section 2-117. 
(c)  Competitive quotations over $10,000.00. Any supply, material, or contractual service to be purchased by the county which has an estimated cost of more than $10,000.00 shall be purchased through formal sealed bids with formal advertising in the local and/or regional newspaper pursuant to sections 2-121 and 2-122. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § VIII; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-120. - Professional services. 
(a)  Professional services may be required on a project basis, for specific activities, or for certain durations of time. Procurement of these services shall be the primary responsibility of the user agency with the assistance of the purchasing manager. A contract for professional services shall be awarded to the best-qualified proposal based on the evaluation of the proposals and negotiation of reasonable and fair compensation for services. 
(b)  Professional service contracts which exceed a contract period of one year shall stipulate that the county may, at its own discretion, terminate said contract for cause or otherwise, at any time prior to the close of the contract period. Professional service needs shall be limited to a maximum of five years without again requesting proposals for such general services from the professional community unless expressly excepted by the board of commissioners. Services provided by some licensed professionals, such as practitioners of law, medicine, accountants, or professional consultants may not be subject to competitive bidding. Professional service contracts excluded from competitive bidding will be approved by the board of commissioners and will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  The initial selection of such professional services shall be accomplished as outlined below. Fees for such services may be negotiated at the time of such designation or on a project/activities basis. 
(1)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of less than $2,500.00 may be purchased from any approved list of professionals recommended by the user agency or, in the absence of such recommendation, from any approved professional selected by the purchasing manager. Each such purchase shall be authorized by the head of the user agency. Any or all bids or quotations may be rejected as per section 2-117. 
(2)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of not less than $2,500.00 but not more than $4,999.99 shall be purchased on the open market, without regard for formal advertising. Upon the receipt of documented written or oral proposals from at least three qualified professionals for the service if three such professionals exist, the user agency shall select and the purchasing manager shall award the contract. Any or all bids or quotations may be rejected, as per section 2-117. 
(3)  Professional services which have an estimated cost of not less than $5,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 shall be purchased on the open market, without regard for formal advertising. Upon receipt of written proposals from at least three qualified professionals of the service if three such professionals exist, the user agency with the assistance of the purchasing manager shall select and the board of commissioners shall award the contract. Any or all bids may be rejected, as per section 2-117. 
(4)  Professional services that have an estimated cost of more than $10,000.00 shall be purchased through a request for proposal. When determined appropriate by the board of commissioners, solicitation may be made through formal advertising in the local or regional newspapers, or any other similar means to notify the professional community. The user agency with assistance from the purchasing manager will make a recommended selection, and the board of commissioners shall award the contract. The board of commissioners reserves the right to reject any or all bids, as per section 2-117. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § IX; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Ord. of 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-121. - Invitations to bid. 
(a)  Invitations to bid will be sent to at least three vendors where that many are available to provide the items or services required. 
(b)  Invitations to bid for projects expected to be in excess of $10,000.00 shall be by sealed bid and shall be published in the legal organ of the county for two consecutive weeks (except as noted in section 2-122. 
(c)  The legal advertisement of invitations for bids shall identify what item(s) are being bought, the date of the closing of the bids, time, date, and location of bid openings, the specifications for the project, equipment or service, or the location of such specifications. 
(d)  Bid openings will be made public, and the general public will be permitted to attend. Bid amounts submitted for public works contracts will not be made available to the public until it is determined by the board of commissioners that further negotiations will not be required. 
(e)  Bids, which are received after the designated time and date, will be considered null and void. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § X; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-122. - Public works contracts. 
(a)  All public works construction contracts subject to this section entered into by the board of commissioners with private persons or entities shall be in writing and on file and available for public inspection in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  (1)  Prior to entering into a public works construction contract other than those exempted by 2-122(g), the board of commissioners shall publicly advertise the contract opportunity. Such notice shall be posted conspicuously in the office of the board of commissioners and shall be advertised in the legal organ. All invitations for bids for public works contracts, i.e. improvements or additions to any county building, road, etc., in excess of $100,000.00 shall be by sealed bid and advertised in the legal organ a minimum of two times, with the first advertisement occurring at least four weeks prior to the opening of the sealed bids or proposals. The second advertisement shall follow no earlier than two weeks from the first advertisement. Notice of the contract shall also be posted on the courthouse door during the advertising period. 
(2)  Contract opportunities that will be awarded by competitive sealed bids shall have plans and specifications available on the first day of the advertisement and shall be open to inspection by the public. The plans and specifications shall indicate if the project will be awarded by base bid or base bid plus selected alternates, and: 
a.  A statement listing whether all anticipated federal, state, or local permits required for the project have been obtained or an indication of the status of the application for each such permit including when it is expected to be obtained; and 
b.  A statement listing whether all anticipated rights of way and easements required for the project have been obtained or an indication of the status as to when each such rights of way or easements are expected to be obtained. 
(3)  Contract opportunities that will be awarded by competitive sealed proposals shall be publicly advertised with a request for proposals which request shall include conceptual program information in the request for proposals describing the requested services in a level of detail appropriate to the project delivery method selected for the project. 
(4)  The advertisement shall include such details and specifications as will enable the public to know the extent and character of the work to be done. 
(5)  All required notices of advertisement shall also advise of any mandatory prequalification requirements or pre-bid conferences. Any advertisement which provides notice of a mandatory pre-bid conference or prequalification shall provide reasonable advance notice of said conference or for the submittal of such prequalification information. 
(c)  All public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of this section which place the bidder or offeror at risk for construction and require labor or building materials in the execution of the contract shall be awarded on the basis of competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to reject all bids or proposals or any bid or proposal that is nonresponsive or not responsible and to waive technicalities and informalities. 
(d)  No addenda modifying plans and specifications shall be issued within a period of 72 hours prior to the advertised time for the opening of bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. However, if the necessity arises to issue an addendum modifying plans and specifications within the 72-hour period prior to the advertised time for the opening of bids or proposals, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, then the opening of bids or proposals shall be extended at least 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, from the date of the original bid or proposal opening without need to re-advertise. 
(e)  Any competitive sealed bidding process shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall publicly advertise an invitation for bids; 
(2)  Bidders shall submit sealed bids based on the criteria set forth in such invitation; 
(3)  The board of commissioners shall open the bids publicly and evaluate such bids without discussion with the bidders; and 
(4)  The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids; provided, however, that if the bid from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder exceeds the funds budgeted for the public works construction contract, the board of commissioners may negotiate with such apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within the budgeted amount. Such negotiations may include changes in the scope of work and other bid requirements. 
(f)  Any competitive sealed proposal shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall publicly advertise a request for proposals, which request shall include conceptual program information in the request for proposals describing the requested services in a level of detail appropriate to the project delivery method selected for the project, as well as the relative importance of the evaluation factors; 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall open all proposals received at the time and place designated in the request for proposals so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiations; and 
(3)  The board of commissioners shall make an award to the responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the county, taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. The evaluation factors shall be the basis on which the award decision is made. The contract file shall indicate the basis on which the award is made. 
(4)  Discussions, negotiations, and revisions may be permitted after submission of proposals and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In accordance with the request for proposals, all responsible offerors found by the board of commissioners to have submitted proposals reasonably susceptible of being selected for award shall be given an opportunity to participate in such discussions, negotiations, and revisions. During the process of discussion, negotiation, and revision, the board of commissioners shall not disclose the contents of proposals to competing offerors. 
(g)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to public works construction projects, when the same can be performed at a cost of less than $100,000.00. Public works construction projects shall not be subdivided in an effort to evade the provisions of this section. 
(2)  This section shall not apply in the event that the board of commissioners contracts with a governmental entity having a correctional institution for the use of inmate labor from such institution and use the inmates in the performance of any public works construction project. 
(3)  This section shall not apply in the event that the labor used or to be used in a public works construction project is furnished at no expense by the state or federal government or any agency thereof, and the board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to purchase material for such public works construction project and use the labor furnished free to the county. 
(4)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to public works construction projects necessitated by an emergency; provided, however, that the nature of the emergency shall be described in the minutes of the board of commissioners. Any contract let by the county pursuant to this subsection shall be ratified, as soon as practicable, on the minutes of the board of commissioners, and the nature of the emergency shall be described therein. 
(5)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to public works construction projects or any portion of a public works construction project self-performed by the board of commissioners. If the board of commissioners contracts with a private person or entity for a portion of such project, the provisions of this section shall apply to any such contract estimated to exceed $100,000.00. 
(6)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to sole source public works construction contracts. 
(h)  Bid bond requirements. 
(1)  Bid bonds shall be required for all public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of this subsection with estimated bids or proposals over $100,000.00. However, the board of commissioners may require a bid bond for projects with estimated bids or proposals of $100,000.00 or less. 
(2)  In the case of competitive sealed bids, a bid may not be revoked or withdrawn until 60 days after the time set by the board of commissioners for opening of bids. Upon expiration of this time period, the bid will cease to be valid, unless the bidder provides written notice to the board of commissioners prior to the scheduled expiration date that the bid will be extended for a time period specified by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  In the case of competitive sealed proposals, the board of commissioners shall advise offerors in the request for proposals of the number of days that offerors will be required to honor their proposals; provided, however, that if an offeror is not selected within 60 days of opening the proposals, any offeror that is determined by the board of commissioners to be unlikely of being selected for contract award shall be released from his or her proposal. 
(4)  If the board of commissioners requires a bid bond for any public works construction contract, no bid or proposal for a contract with the board of commissioners shall be valid for any purpose unless the contractor shall give a bid bond with good and sufficient surety or sureties approved by the board of commissioners. The bid bond shall be in the amount of not less than five percent of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract. 
(5)  In lieu of the bid bond provided for in this subsection, the board of commissioners may accept a cashier's check, or cash in the amount of not less than five percent of the total amount payable by the terms of the contract payable to and for the protection of the county. 
(6)  When the amount of any bid bond required under this subsection does not exceed $750,000.00, the board of commissioners may, in its sole discretion, accept an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association in the amount and in lieu of the bond otherwise required. 
(i)  Withdrawal of bids for appreciable errors. 
(1)  As used in this subsection, the term bid includes proposal and the term bidder includes offeror. 
(2)  A bidder shall be permitted to withdraw a bid from consideration after the bid opening without forfeiture of the bid security if the bidder has made an appreciable error in the calculation of his or her bid and if: 
a.  Such error in the calculation of his or her bid can be documented by clear and convincing written evidence; 
b.  Such error can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of the original work papers, documents, or materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn; 
c.  The bidder serves written notice upon the board of commissioners prior to the award of the contract and not later than 48 hours after the opening of bids, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays; 
d.  The bid was submitted in good faith and the mistake was due to a calculation or clerical error, an inadvertent omission, or a typographical error as opposed to an error in judgment; and 
e.  The withdrawal of the bid will not result in undue prejudice to the governmental entity or other bidders by placing them in a materially worse position than they would have occupied if the bid had never been submitted. 
(3)  In the event that an apparent successful bidder has withdrawn his or her bid as provided in subsection (i)(2), action on the remaining bids should be considered as though the withdrawn bid had not been received. In the event the project is re-let for bids, under no circumstances shall a bidder who has filed a request to withdraw a bid be permitted to resubmit a bid for the work. 
(4)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid pursuant to subsection (i)(2) shall for compensation supply any material or labor to, or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for, the person or firm to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(j)  Withdrawal of bid or proposals by affiliated corporation. 
(1)  Affiliated corporation means, with respect to any corporation, any other corporation related thereto: 
a.  As a parent corporation; 
b.  As a subsidiary corporation; 
c.  As a sister corporation; 
d.  By common ownership or control; or 
e.  By control of one corporation by the other. 
(2)  In any case where two or more affiliated corporations bid or propose for a contract under this subsection and any one or more of such affiliated corporations subsequently rescind or revoke their bid or proposal in favor of another such affiliated corporation whose bid or proposal is for a higher amount and the contract is awarded at such higher amount to such other affiliated corporation, then the bid bond, proposal guaranty, or other security otherwise required under this subsection of each affiliated corporation rescinding or revoking its bid or proposal shall be forfeited. 
(k)  Performance bond requirements. 
(1)  Performance bonds shall be required for all public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of this subsection with an estimated contract amount greater than $100,000.00; provided however, that the board of commissioners may require a performance bond for public works construction contracts that are estimated at $100,000.00 or less. No public works construction contract requiring a performance bond shall be valid for any purpose unless the contractor shall give such performance bond. The performance bond shall be in the amount of at least the total amount payable by the terms of the contract and shall be increased as the contract amount is increased. 
(2)  When the amount of the performance bond required under this subsection does not exceed $750,000.00, the board of commissioners may, in its sole discretion, accept an irrevocable letter of credit by a bank or savings and loan association in the amount of and in lieu of the bond otherwise required under this subsection. 
(l)  Requirement for payment bonds. Payment bonds shall be required for all public works construction contracts subject to the requirements of this subsection with an estimated contract amount greater than $100,000.00; provided, however, that the board of commissioners may require a payment bond for public works construction contracts that are estimated at $100,000.00 or less. No public works construction contract requiring a payment bond shall be valid for any purpose, unless the contractor shall give such payment bond; provided, however, that, in lieu of such payment bond, the board of commissioners, in its discretion, may accept a cashier's check, certified check, or cash for the use and protection of all subcontractors and all persons supplying labor, materials, machinery, and equipment in the prosecution of work provided in the contract. The payment bond or other security accepted in lieu of a payment bond shall be in the amount of at least the total amount payable by the terms of the initial contract and shall be increased if requested by the board of commissioners as the contract amount is increased. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XI; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-123. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
The board of commissioners and/or purchasing manager, as determined by the authority to award bids or quotations for contracts and/or purchases, shall be authorized to waive any and all bidding requirements for the purchase of necessary materials, supplies, equipment, or services under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Emergency purchases. An emergency purchase will be authorized when conditions exist which present a threat to the safety, health, and welfare of the citizens of the county and whenever such requirements would cause an undue delay in the delivery of essential county services under such conditions. Emergency purchases shall be made pursuant to the purchasing manual. If an emergency should arise after hours or on holidays, which requires immediate action on the part of the department involved for the protection and best interest of the county, or should a like situation arise on a weekend, and where it is not possible to reach the purchasing manager, any purchase necessary shall be made by the user agency's department head, and such purchase reported to the purchasing manager pursuant to the attached purchasing manual. 
(2)  Cooperative purchasing agreements. Cooperative purchasing agreements will be formed whenever, in the judgment of the board of commissioners and/or the purchasing manager, it would be in the best interest of the county to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements with other units of government. 
(3)  Federal and state contract purchases. Whenever any goods or services are available to the county through a contract with the federal or state government, and when such items or services meet the requirements of a user agency, such items or services shall be deemed to have met all requirements of competitive bidding and may be purchased under the federal or state contract without regard to further government requirements. 
(4)  Professional/contractual services. Professional/contractual services may not be subject to competitive bidding pursuant to section 2-120. 
(5)  Sole source purchases. The purchasing manager shall be authorized to designate a sole source for any item or service, the purchase of which, due to specific scientific technology or extraordinary specifications and circumstances, is available from only one vendor. Any such purchase shall be documented as to the reasons for the sole source and shall be maintained by the purchasing manager. 
(6)  Road paving purchases. The purchasing manager is authorized to approve purchases not to exceed $100,000.00 without advertisement or bids for road surfacing materials, such as gravel, asphalt, concrete and pipe, for any complete road surfacing or resurfacing project within the county. 
(7)  Election materials purchase. In circumstances where the state designates a particular vendor for the purchase of election materials, these items will be purchased with a county purchase order without regard to further requirements of this division, excluding budgetary constraints. 
(8)  Limited vendor purchases. In cases where available vendors for a given item or service to be purchased are outside the general circulation of the county's legal organ, the board of commissioners may waive the requirement to advertise the request for sealed bid. In all cases where the board waives the advertising requirement, a copy of the request for sealed bid will be posted in a prominent location within the courthouse and all known qualified vendors will be sent a request for sealed bid. 
(9)  Used equipment purchases. 
a.  In cases where Peach County is seeking opportunities to purchase used equipment, the user agency will write minimum specifications and requirements for the piece of equipment being sought. The purchasing manager will post the specifications with details on the time period that the search for suitable used equipment will be performed and sufficient information for prospective vendors holding used equipment meeting the specifications to respond to the posting and make the availability of their equipment known to the county. The posting will be placed in the courthouse at a location known to the public for such postings, on the county website, and emailed to vendors that have provided an email address. All vendor submissions will be evaluated by the user agency, with consideration being given to price, suitability, specifications, age, condition, and distance. 
b.  In cases where the county is seeking opportunities to purchase used equipment expected to cost at least $10,000.00, the purchasing manager will post the specifications with details on the time period that the search for suitable used equipment will be performed by formal advertisement in the legal organ of the county. Said advertisement shall run for two consecutive weeks. 
c.  Transactions between Peach County and any other governmental entity shall be exempt from the above stated policy. Peach County shall retain the right to purchase, transfer, donate, or sale [sell] any piece of used equipment with the Georgia Department of Administrative Services or with any other governmental entity. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XII; Ord. of 4-26-1994; Amd. of 12-8-2009; Mo. of 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-124. - Local preference. 
It shall be the policy of the county government to encourage, stimulate, and foster the expansion of existing business/industry and to encourage the location of new businesses/industries/industries in the community. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XIII) 
Sec. 2-125. - Authorized purchases. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein and in the attached purchasing manual, all purchases for materials, supplies, and services for the county shall be on an official Peach County purchase order as prescribed in this division, issued by the purchasing manager or his designee, and in accordance with the procedures in the attached purchasing manual. 
(b)  No department head, public official, or employee shall commit to any vendor for the purchase of any supplies or services except those exemptions noted herein and in the attached purchasing manual. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no purchase order shall be issued on behalf of the county unless there is a sufficient unencumbered fund balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, of the user agency to cover the amount of such purchase. 
(d)  Any purchase made outside the provisions and procedures stated in this division and purchasing manual, to include the provisions for bona fide emergencies, will not be paid with county funds. These obligations will be incurred by the individual responsible for the purchase. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XIV; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-126. - Price agreement contracts. 
Goods or services used by one or more user agencies on a regular and continuing basis may be purchased under a contract covering a specified extended period of time, at an established price for such goods or services, which shall be valid for the duration of the contract period. Purchase agreements under this section shall be subject to applicable bidding or quotation requirements as any other purchase. 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XV) 
Sec. 2-127. - Vendor in default. 
The purchasing manager shall not accept any bid or quotation from, nor issue any purchase order to, any vendor or contractor for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The vendor is in default on the payment of any county taxes, license fee, or other monies due the county. 
(2)  The vendor is in default due to a declaration of ineligibility pursuant to section 2-114(5). 
(Ord. of 10-26-1993, § XVI; Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-128. - Protest procedures. 
The following procedures and time requirements shall be applied uniformly in processing all protests pertaining to the contract solicitation process or contract award decision. 
(1)  Protests may be made by active or prospective bidders whose direct economic interest would be affected by a solicitation, proposed award, or award of a contract. 
(2)  Protests must be made in writing and be received within the timelines of this policy and should be concise, logically arranged, clearly state the grounds for the protest, and must include at least the following information. 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of protestor. 
b.  Solicitation or contract name and/or number. 
c.  A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds for the protest, including copies of all relevant documents or information. 
d.  A statement of relief requested. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a protest, the purchasing manager will notify the protestor by mail within five working days that the protest has been received. The purchasing manager may request additional information from the protesting party, which must be submitted in writing to the purchasing manager within five working days from the date of the purchasing manager's request. The purchasing manager will forward all documentation submitted by the protestor to the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Within 20 working days of receipt of a written protest, the board of commissioners shall either: 
a.  Issue a final written decision which responds in detail to each issue raised in the protest and includes a rationale for the decision rendered, or 
b.  Conduct, at the county's discretion, an informal hearing to allow the interested participating parties an opportunity to present their positions and supporting facts, documents, justification, and technical information. The county will advise all interested parties of the final decision in writing no later than five working days from the date of the informal hearing. 
(5)  The county's decision shall be final. A request to reconsider such decision will only be allowed if relevant data becomes available that was not previously known or if there has been an error of law or regulation. Such a request for reconsideration must be made within five working days after notification of the county's final decision. 
(6)  Protests before proposal solicitation. Bid protests alleging restrictive specifications or improprieties, which are apparent prior to bid or proposal opening, must be submitted in writing to the purchasing manager and must be received at least five working days prior to bid/proposal opening. If the written protest is not received by the time specified, bids or proposals may be received, opened, and awarded in the normal manner unless the county determines that it is in the best interest of all concerned to delay any step. Bids will not be opened until five working days after resolution of the protest unless the county determines that: 
a.  The items to be procured are urgently required; 
b.  Delivery or performance will be unduly delayed by failure to make award promptly; or 
c.  Failure to make award will otherwise cause undue harm to the county. 
(7)  Protests after opening of proposal solicitation and prior to award. Protests against the making of an award may be made after bid opening and prior to award. Such protests must be submitted in writing to the purchasing manager and must be received by the purchasing manager within five working days of the bid opening. If the county decides to withhold the award pending resolution of the protest, the county will notify all bidders whose bids or proposal might become eligible for award, and offer them the option to extend or withdraw their bid or proposal. Awards will not be made until at least five working days after resolution of the protest unless the county determines that: 
a.  The items to be procured are urgently required; 
b.  Delivery or performance will be unduly delayed by failure to make award promptly; or 
c.  Failure to make award will otherwise cause undue harm to the county. 
(8)  Protests after award. Protests received after announcement of an award or after a contract has been executed will only be considered if the county determines that the matter is in the public interest or the protest presents clear and convincing evidence of fraud, misrepresentation, other illegality, or gross impropriety in the selection of a proposal. If a protest is under consideration, the county shall evaluate the proposal at issue a second time in its entirety and use the same evaluation criteria and rating factors applied in the initial review of the proposal. The proposal will be evaluated by the board of commissioners. 
(9)  Protests after contract executed. If a protest involving an executed contract is under consideration, the county will notify the selected contractor of the protest and its basis and may, at its discretion, order the contractor to suspend all county work activities. If the awarded contractor has not executed the contract as of the date the protest is received by the county, the contract will not be executed until five working days after resolution of the protest unless the county determines that: 
a.  The items to be procured are urgently required; 
b.  Delivery or performance will be unduly delayed by failure to make award promptly; or 
c.  Failure to make award will otherwise cause undue harm to the county. 
(10)  Solicitations and awards for projects funded by the Federal Transit Administration. 
a.  The county shall, in all instances involving the solicitation and award of projects funded by the Federal Transit Administration, report any protest or dispute to the FTA within five working days from the date the protest is filed with the county. The county shall provide to the FTA within five working days following the county's decision on the protest, copies of all documents pursuant to the protest and a copy of the written decision pursuant to the protest. 
b.  A protestor may file an appeal with the Federal Transit Administration under certain limited circumstances where the bid solicitation and contract award is for a project that is being funded through the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), after the county has rendered a decision on a bid protest. FTA's review of any protest will be limited to an alleged failure by the county to have written protest procedures or alleged failure by the county to follow such procedures. 
c.  A protestor desiring to do so shall file its protest with FTA not later than five days after the final decision of the county is rendered under the county's protest procedure. In instances where the protestor alleges that the county failed to make a final determination on the protest, the protestor shall file a complaint with FTA no later than five days after the protestor knew or should have known of the county's failure to render a final determination on the protest. 
d.  Protests to FTA should be filed with the appropriate FTA Regional Office with a concurrent copy to the county. The protest filed with FTA shall be filed in accordance with FTA Circular 4220.1E, include the name and address of the protestor, identify the county project number, contain a statement of the grounds for the protest and any supporting documentation, and include a copy of the local protest filed with the county and a copy of the county's decision, if any. 
e.  The submission of unsolicited proposals for FTA contract funds is inconsistent with county policy to promote a full and open competition among interested parties. The filing of unsolicited proposals for FTA contract funds, therefore, will be deemed inappropriate by the county and returned to the sender, and complaints or appeals calling for reconsideration of such proposals will not be accepted. 
(Amd. of 12-8-2009) 
Secs. 2-129—2-138. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INVESTMENT POLICY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-13-2007, was renumbered for classification purposes at the editor's discretion. The provisions have been included as §§ 2-139—2-153. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-139. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the Peach County Board of Commissioners to establish regulations and procedures to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible investment management program, to diversify investment portfolios by maturity date, to structure investment portfolios to meet all anticipated net outflows that are projected to occur, and to ensure that the administration of such a program is in accordance with the highest ethical and fiscal standards and applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-140. - Applicability. 
(a)  This policy governs the investment of the "General Fund Investment Portfolio," which includes the General Fund. 
(b)  This policy governs the investment of the "Special Revenue Fund Portfolio," which encompasses enterprise funds and special revenue funds, as follows: 
(1)  Solid Waste Management Enterprise Fund; 
(2)  Special Purpose Local Option Sales Tax Funds; 
(3)  E911 Fund; 
(4)  Hotel/Motel Fund; 
(5)  Transit Fund; 
(c)  This policy does not govern the General Employee's Pension Fund. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-141. - Objective. 
Investment of the funds covered by this policy shall be governed by the following investment objectives: 
(a)  Legality. All investments shall fully comply with federal, state, and local laws. Additional requirements are discussed in the authorized and suitable investment section of this investment policy. 
(b)  Safety. Safety of principal is the primary objective of the investment policy. Investment of the county funds shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital for the overall portfolio. 
(c)  Liquidity. The county's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the county to meet all operating requirements that might be reasonably anticipated. 
(d)  Yield. The county's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return, throughout budgetary and economic cycles, while taking into consideration the investment risk constraints and cash flow characteristics of the portfolio. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-142. - Delegation of authority. 
The Peach County Board of Commissioners shall assume ultimate responsibility regarding investment decisions on behalf of the county. The board of commissioners designates the county administrator to approve the bidding and/or re-bidding of due investments and new investments. Under the provisions of state and county codes, the county administrator has the ability to designate an employee of the finance division to manage the daily investments of county funds. This responsibility has been designated to the accounting manager who assumes the day-to-day investment management. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-143. - Controls and procedures. 
(a)  The county administrator or his/her designee shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to any other persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the written procedures. Authority granted to a person to invest the county's funds is effective until rescinded or until termination of the person's employment by the county. The county administrator shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls, to be reviewed by the county auditor, to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. Both the county administrator and the accounting manager shall possess sufficient working knowledge of economics and securities markets, as well as the supervisory experience and judgment necessary to carry out the responsibilities outlined in this policy. 
(b)  Formal written procedures shall also include but not be limited to: 
(1)  A formal process that outlines procedures relating to the purchase and sale of securities. 
(2)  A formal reporting system to monitor the performance of investment securities held. This system shall include written reports as outlined in sections 3-123 and 3-124 of this policy. 
(3)  A system of compliance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) of the Government Accounting Standards Board. 
(4)  A system of internal controls, designed to detect errors, misrepresentation or imprudent actions. 
(5)  Thorough cross training of department employees to allow for back up of critical investment duties. 
(6)  An annual review of investment operations by the county's auditors. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-144. - Prudence. 
The accounting manager shall adhere to the "prudent investor" standard as suggested by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA), which states that: "Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived." 
(a)  The "prudent investor" standard shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers who exercise due diligence and act in accordance with the investment policy and written procedures, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. 
(b)  Accounting manager, while acting in accordance with this policy and written procedures pertaining to the administration and management of the county's assets, and who exercises proper due diligence, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided that deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control and prevent any further adverse developments. 
(c)  Securities shall not be purchased with trading or speculation as the dominant selection criteria. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-145. - Ethics and conflicts of interest. 
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. 
(a)  Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall disclose any material interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business. 
(b)  Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of the investment portfolio. The county's statute on conflict of interest and disclosure shall be strictly followed. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-146. - Authorized and suitable investments. 
(a)  Instruments rated below an AAA rating may not be purchased. However, investments in instruments other than government securities shall be made only if the yield is equal to or greater than the bond equivalent yield on U.S. Treasury obligations of comparable maturity. County funds governed by this policy may be invested in the instruments described below. 
(1)  Obligations of the State of Georgia or of other states; 
(2)  The local government investment pool established by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-8; 
(3)  Obligations issued by the United States government; 
(4)  Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency: 
a.  Federal Farm Credit System; 
b.  Federal Home Loan Bank System; 
c.  Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; 
d.  Federal National Mortgage Association; 
e.  Student Loan Marketing Association; 
f.  Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation. 
(b)  Purchase of non-negotiable certificates of deposit. 
(c)  Investments not listed, including options and reverse repurchase agreements, are strictly prohibited. In addition, the board of commissioners may at times restrict or prohibit the purchase of specific issues due to current market conditions. 
(d)  No public deposit shall be made except in a qualified public depository as established by state law. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-147. - Competitive bidding. 
(a)  It is the policy of the county to limit investment transactions to those banks and broker/dealers on the Peach County's approved bid list. In addition, the county shall seek three competitive bids and offers on all individual security purchases and sales. 
(b)  All bids and offers received shall be documented and retained. It shall be the responsibility of the accounting manager associated with the transaction to record the following minimum information: 
(1)  Financial institution selected; 
(2)  Rate quoted; 
(3)  Security description; 
(4)  Cover bids/offers; 
(5)  Special considerations in the event that the lowest priced security was not selected. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-148. - Collateralization. 
(a)  The county requires that all investments plus accrued interest, if any, in depository accounts be secured in accordance with this policy. 
(b)  Collateral will always be held by an independent third party and shall be reviewed at least monthly to ensure that the market value of the pledged securities is adequate. 
(1)  Securities authorized for collateral under this policy are limited to those investments outlined in section 3-118 (a)(1-4), (b). 
(2)  The collateralization level for certificates of deposit shall be 110 percent of the market value of principal and accrued interest. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-149. - Safekeeping and custody. 
Safekeeping and custody of securities and collateral shall be in accordance with state law. All securities transactions, except local government investment pool and money market mutual fund transactions shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment (DVP) basis. Securities and collateral will be held by a third party custodian, and shall be held in the county's name as evidenced by original safekeeping receipts of the institution with which the securities are deposited. The custodian shall also provide monthly safekeeping statements that contain sufficient detail of securities held including, but not limited to, par, security type, CUSIP, maturity date, coupon and market value. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-150. - Diversification and maximum maturities. 
The county shall seek to ladder the maturities of the portfolio to correspond with known projected cash flow needs, taking into consideration large reoccurring expenditure items such as payroll and bond disbursements. The county shall seek to maintain a weighted-average maturity of the total portfolio not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-151. - Portfolio monitoring. 
All trading losses incurred shall be reported immediately to the county administrator with appropriate documentation that formed the basis for the transaction. A summary of trading gains and losses shall be provided to the county administrator not less than on a monthly basis in order to determine the propriety of trading activity. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-152. - Reporting. 
The accounting manager shall prepare a monthly investment report. This report, which will include a summary of the current status of the general investment portfolio and security transactions made over the prior month, will be provided to the Peach County Board of Commissioners. The report as a minimum should include: 
(a)  Detail of portfolio holdings and interest earned; 
(b)  Maturity dates; 
(c)  A budget comparison. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 2-153. - Investment strategies. 
(a)  The following strategies may be used to maximize return on investments: 
(1)  Matching maturities to anticipated cash flow requirements; 
(2)  Anticipating market changes. 
(b)  Although it is not possible to consistently predict market trends, an understanding of the factors that affect the market is important when determining an optimal maturity for the portfolio. Trading is not to be made solely on the basis of interest rate forecasts, but specific decisions involving maturity dates should consider short-term market expectations. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2007) 
Secs. 2-154—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVSION 4. - PURCHASING CARD AND CREDIT CARD FOR PEACH COUNTY ELECTED OFFICIALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 8, 2015, §§ I—VII, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Div. 4, §§ 2-181—2-187, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-181. - Intent and scope. 
This division is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. No. 12-8-2015, § I) 
Sec. 2-182. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Peach County Board of Commissioners. 
County means Peach County and/or the board of commissioners. 
County purchase card , county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase gods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § II) 
Sec. 2-183. - Designated elected officials. 
The Peach County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this division or for any purchases that are not authorized by this division. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § III) 
Sec. 2-184. - Card administrator. 
The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this division, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § IV) 
Sec. 2-185. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases . County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this division, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
The board of commissioners, at its sole discretion, may provide a credit card and/or purchasing card to select elected officials on a non-temporary basis, and said elected official shall: 
(1)  Ensure that the use of each card is accounted for on forms provided by the finance department; 
(2)  Ensure that each card is secured when not in use; 
(3)  Designate which subordinates, if any, are authorized to use the credit card and/or purchasing card and provide said authorization listing to card administrator; 
(4)  Ensure that sufficient purchase documentation and corresponding receipts are provided to the finance department in a timely manner to ensure that each billing statement is reconciled monthly; 
(5)  Ensure that any billing discrepancies are resolved with the vendor; 
(6)  Document any unauthorized use of the credit card and/or purchasing card and report same to the card administrator; 
(7)  Document any vendor disputes related to the credit card and/or purchasing card and report same to the card administrator on at least a monthly basis; and 
(8)  Notify the card administrator immediately upon learning that a credit card and/or purchasing card is lost or stolen. 
Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $2,500.00 
Per budget year: Not to exceed approved budget appropriation 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases . County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation . Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(d)  Public records . All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § V) 
Sec. 2-186. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases . All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: 
(a)  The card administrator will be responsible for the issue of a county credit card or purchasing card and will record said issuance on a "cardholder approval and acknowledgement form." Each Peach County Elected Official will be required to sign the acknowledgement form upon receipt of the card. 
(b)  The Peach County Elected Official will provide the date, time, purpose, vendor name (if known), amount (if known) and general ledger account number(s) for the purchases to be made with the credit card or purchasing card. 
(c)  The Peach County Elected Official will promptly [within two business days] return all county credit cards and purchasing cards to the card administrator following the completion of the official county business or purchase for which the card was applied. All paperwork documenting the purchase will be returned to the card administrator with the card. 
(d)  The Peach County Elected Official will complete all required purchasing procedures as dictated in the Peach County Purchasing Ordinance pursuant to the credit card or purchasing card transaction. 
(2)  Audits . The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § VI) 
Sec. 2-187. - Violations. 
(a)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this division or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this division may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county-issued purchase card or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2015, § VII) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 8; alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment establishments, § 8-35; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6(c); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by an ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 1995, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. II, §§ 6-20—6-41. Formerly, § 6-1 saved from repeal the alcoholic beverage ordinance adopted May 29, 1973. 

Sec. 6-20. - Application. 
The following rules, requirements, licenses and standards shall be effective from September 12, 1995, and shall remain in effect until amended and/or modified thereafter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95) 
Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Peach County. 
Licensee means the person whose name appears upon a retail dealer's license and shall include the business entity operating pursuant thereto. 
Licensed premises means the business location of a licensed retail dealer existing on a single contiguous tract of real estate and operating under one name. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt beer, and strong beer, but not including sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells malt beverages or wine, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail dealer's license or license means a license to sell malt beverages or wine at retail either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, issued by the governing authority pursuant to and subject to the terms of this article. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 1; Mo. of 11-14-95; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
State Law reference— Similiar provisions, O.G.C.A. 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-22. - Construction of definitions. 
As used in this article, defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 2) 
Sec. 6-23. - Retail dealer licenses; applications; notice; fingerprints; bonds; restrictions; standards; hearing. 
(a)  No malt beverages or wine shall be sold in Peach County except as authorized by a retail dealer's license issued pursuant to this article. Licenses issued hereunder shall authorize the sale of malt beverages and wine, as defined herein, only. Separate licenses are required for the sale of malt beverages and for the sale of wine. 
(b)  Application for a retail dealer's license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority. A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official gazette of Peach County, Georgia once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the governing authority in which the application is to be acted upon. 
(c)  Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Peach County Sheriff's Department who shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for a period of five years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity. The Peach County Sheriff's Department shall also submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority considering such application. 
Where it appears to the governing authority that an application is complete except for the F.B.I. fingerprint report, and that the applicant otherwise qualifies for a retail dealer's license, the governing authority may grant the license contingent on receiving a satisfactory F.B.I. report. Should the report provide grounds for denying the license, the license may be revoked immediately as though the application had been denied, and the licensee shall have the right to a hearing. 
(d)  Along with their application, applicants must post with the governing authority a personal performance bond, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the governing authority in accordance with the nature of the violation after a hearing is held by the said governing authority. Written notice of such hearing shall be given to the alleged violator not less than 15 days prior thereto. The determination by the governing authority to forfeit such bond may be in addition to any action taken by the governing authority under section 6-40. Said bond shall be payable to Peach County, Georgia in the amount of $1,000.00, said bond to be approved by the governing authority and shall be executed in the form specified by the governing authority. However, nothing herein shall preclude the governing authority from waiving said bond requirement whenever a licensee has established sufficient financial responsibility and/or a record of faithful compliance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, the State of Georgia and the County of Peach. 
(e)  No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person or corporation unless such person is of legal age and such person or corporation is a resident of Peach County, Georgia or has its principal place of business located in peach County, Georgia. 
(f)  No employee of Peach County, Georgia shall be eligible to receive a retail dealer's license. 
(g)  The following standards shall be applied to all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
(1)  All applicants for a retail dealer's license must show financial responsibility. The governing authority may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. 
(2)  All applicants for a retail dealer's license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(3)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with Federal, State or the laws of Peach County, Georgia. Furthermore, no license shall be granted if any operators, managers, clerks, or other employees employed by the applicant has been convicted under any Federal, State, or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with Federal, State or the laws of Peach County, Georgia. 
(4)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for a retail dealer's license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(5)  The governing authority, in their discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in the governing authority's sole judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(h)  All decisions of the governing authority either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail within ten days of the decision. 
(i)  Whenever the governing authority shall deny an application for a retail dealer's license, the applicant shall have 15 days following notification of denial to request a hearing before the governing authority. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses at such hearing either with or without legal counsel. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 3; Ord. of 4-6-96; Ord. of 9-10-96; Mo. of 11-6-96; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-24. - Premises. 
No retail dealer's license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit for a building to be built or renovated are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of Peach County, Georgia, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner and the laws of the State of Georgia. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector for Peach County. Each such building shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail dealer's license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. A separate retail dealer's license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 4) 
Sec. 6-25. - Distance requirements. 
No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location, including parking lot, is situated not less than 100 yards from any church building, not less than 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center, the same to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a retail dealer's license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church building, school ground or campus, or alcohol rehabilitation center, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 5) 
Sec. 6-26. - Term of license; renewal. 
A retail dealer's license shall be valid only for the 12-month period from the date of issuance and no license may be renewed except upon approval of the governing authority. A licensee who desires to continue to operate during a subsequent year must apply for renewal prior to the expiration of his or her current license. An application for renewal is subject to the requirements of §§ 6-44—6-46. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 6; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-27. - License fees. 
The fee for each retail dealer's license shall be (as established by the county commission) per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application, and shall be either a bank certified check or money order. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 7; Mo. of 11-6-96; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-28. - Place of sale or delivery of goods. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any malt beverages or wine to any person except in the licensed premises except as exempted under paragraph (b) of this section. A licensee shall be permitted to load only unopened packaged malt beverages and wine into a customer's vehicle when the sale physically takes place and monies have been exchanged inside the licensed premises. A licensee hereunder shall be permitted to have a drive-in window and it shall be permissible for the licensee to deliver unopened packaged malt beverages and wines through such window. "Curb service" type sales and sales to customers in vehicles parked in the parking area of licensed premises are prohibited. All other sales shall be for consumption on the licenses premises only. 
(b)  Open area sales and outdoor special events. 
(1)  Malt beverage and wine sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in an open area type environment or by a licensed caterer with a catering off-premises license at an outdoor special event if the establishment or event has been approved by the county marshal. 
(2)  The open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. 
a.  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of four feet above the floor or ground. It must be approved by the county building inspector and the county fire department as required by governing regulations and codes. 
b.  The only exit from the area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit. 
(3)  An outdoor special event must be enclosed by some structure or fencing providing for public ingress/egress only through designated entrances and exits. 
a.  The outdoor special event must be approved by the county marshal and the Peach County Sheriff on crowd control, traffic, and security measures. 
b.  The event location must be properly zoned and approved by the Peach County Zoning Department. 
(c)  Promotion and sales. 
(1)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall: 
a.  Offer or deliver any free malt beverage or wine to any person or group of persons; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewery, winery, or distillery from distributing free samples in accordance with state law provisions; 
b.  Deliver more than one malt beverage or wine to one person at a time; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brew pub from offering a sampler of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces. Each sampler shall not exceed four different types of beverages. 
c.  The county marshal and the sheriff shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 8; Ord. of 9-10-96; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-29. - Hours of operation. 
No person, knowingly and intentionally, shall sell or offer to sell malt beverages and wine on: 
(1)  Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.; or 
(2)  Election days. Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on election days as the same are defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(3)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 9; Mo. of 11-14-95; Ord. of 9-10-96; Mo. of 12-10-96; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-30. - Minimum age of consumption; exceptions. 
(a)  No retail dealer or employee of a retail dealer shall knowingly furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages or wine to a person prohibited to purchase malt beverages or wine under state law. This prohibition shall not apply with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the malt beverages or wine are being sold is 21 years of age or older. 
(b)  The above prohibition shall not apply with respect to the following: 
(1)  Whenever malt beverages or wine are purchased for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  Whenever malt beverages or wine are purchased for consumption at a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  Whenever malt beverages or wine are possessed for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 10; Mo. of 11-14-95; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-31. - Employment of minors prohibited. 
No licensee shall employ, require, or permit a person under 21 years of age to sell or take orders for any malt beverage or wine. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 11; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-32. - Furnishing malt beverages or wine to certain persons prohibited. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell, or offer to sell any malt beverages or wine to any person who the licensee knows or reasonably should know is intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 12; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-33. - Retail dealers to buy only from licensed wholesalers. 
No licensee shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way effect the transfer of any malt beverages or wine except from a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 13; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-34. - Retail dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages or wine at any place except the licensed premises, and within the licensed premises the storage area for malt beverages or wine shall be immediately adjacent to the retail area. No licensee shall enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages or wine ordered by the licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 14; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-35. - Licenses not transferable. 
No retail dealer's license issued hereunder shall be transferable or assignable to any other person or location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 15; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-36. - Display of license. 
Licenses issued under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 16; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-37. - Licensees to maintain a copy of the article; employees to be familiar with terms; responsibility of licensee for violations. 
Each licensee shall keep a copy of this article in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee and the licensee's agents and employees selling malt beverages or wine shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The acts of any person working in the licensed premises which occur on the licensed premises and are in violation of this article or of any federal, state or local law relating to the sale, regulation or control of alcoholic beverages or to drugs or gambling shall be attributable to the licensee for the purposes of enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 17; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-38. - Premises open for inspection. 
The licensed premises shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials representing the governing authority authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 18; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-39. - Gambling on premises prohibited. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch-board, slot machines, pin-ball machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed under this article, or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by a licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 19) 
Sec. 6-40. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation, as the governing authority sees fit, of a license: 
(a)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which shall be later found to be false; 
(b)  Violation of any of the terms of this article; 
(c)  With respect to the licensee or any person with an ownership interest in the licensed premises, the violation of any federal, state or local law relating to the sale, control or regulation of alcoholic beverages, drugs, gambling, or taxation. 
(d)  Failure to maintain adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or default on any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to Peach County, Georgia; 
(e)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license, which shall automatically operate to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 20; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-40.1. - Suspension and revocation—Procedure; hearing. 
Any action taken by the governing authority to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and ordinances of Peach County, the State of Georgia, or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the governing authority to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the governing authority shall provide written notice to the licensee within 10 days of such action, said notice stating the action taken and the reasons therefor. The licensee shall have 15 days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the governing authority, which hearing shall be held within 30 days of such request. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and to examine opposing witnesses either with or without counsel. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 20; Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-41. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, § 21) 
Sec. 6-42. - Multiple locations; separate license required. 
Each license issued hereunder shall authorize the sale of malt beverages or wine at one licensed premises only. A person selling alcoholic beverages at more than one licensed premises must obtain a separate license for each location. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96; Mo. of 11-6-96) 
Sec. 6-43. - Operation in accordance with law. 
Licensees shall operate in accordance with the terms of this article and with all applicable federal and state law related to the regulation of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. 3-3-1 et seq. The term "licensee" as used in this part includes agents and employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-44. - License issuance; application procedure. 
(a)  Application. Application for a retail dealer's license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority. Applications shall be made in the name of a natural person and shall include the name of the business entity which will operate pursuant to the license, and the names of all individuals holding an ownership interest in the business entity. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for each retail dealer's license shall be as established by the county commission per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application, and shall be either a bank certified check or money order. 
(c)  Background investigation. Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Peach County Sheriff's Department who shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for a period of two years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity. The Peach County Sheriff's Department shall also submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification records. The Federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority considering such application. When considering an application for renewal of a license, the governing authority may waive compliance with all or any part of this paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-45. - Same—Standards for granting and renewing licenses. 
(a)  Financial responsibility. All applicants for a retail dealer's license must show financial responsibility. The governing authority may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. An application may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial resources to direct and manage the affairs of the business. 
(b)  Legal age. The applicant must be at least 21 years of age. 
(c)  County employees ineligible. No employee of Peach County, Georgia shall be eligible to receive a retail dealer's license. 
(d)  Violation of laws. No retail dealer's license shall be granted or renewed where the individual applicant, or any individual with an ownership interest in the business entity which will operate pursuant to the license, has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any crime related to the sale or regulation of alcoholic beverages, gambling, drugs, or tax law violations, within the two-year period preceding the application date. This section shall not apply to a person who has previously had his or her license revoked by the governing authority. 
(e)  Prior revocation. No person whose retail dealer's license has been revoked by the governing authority shall be granted a license for a period of 12 months from the date the revocation becomes final, or for such lesser period as the governing authority may determine in its discretion, except that no person whose license is revoked by the governing authority due to conviction of, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, a crime related to drugs, gambling, or tax law violations shall be granted a license for a period of two; years from the date the revocation becomes final. No business in which any such person has an ownership interest shall be entitled to operate pursuant to a license for 12 months following the revocation of such person's license. A license revocation becomes final (1) upon the expiration of any applicable period, as provided by this Ordinance or as allowed by law, to request a hearing or appeal with regard to the revocation decision, if no hearing or appeal is requested; or (2) by a decision of the Superior Court of Peach County which has the effect of affirming a decision of the governing authority revoking a license. 
(f)  Condition of premises. No retail dealer's license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit for a building to be built or renovated are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of Peach County, Georgia, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner and the laws of the State of Georgia. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector for Peach County. Each such building shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail dealer's license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. A separate retail dealer's license shall be required for each place of business. 
(g)  Location. No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location, including parking lot, is situated not less than 100 yards from any church building, not less than 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center, and not less than 1,000 feet from any licenced adult entertainment establishment. Distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a retail dealer's license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church building, school ground or campus, alcohol rehabilitation center, or adult entertainment establishment, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this ordinance with reference to this section. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-46. - Same—Temporary issuance. 
Where it appears to the governing authority that an application is complete except for the F.B.I. report as described in paragraph 6-44(c) above, and that the applicant otherwise qualifies for a retail dealer's licence, the governing authority may grant the license contingent on receiving a satisfactory F.B.I. report. Should the report provide grounds for denying the license, the license may be revoked immediately as though the application had been denied, and the licensee shall have the right to a hearing as provided in section 6-23. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Sec. 6-47. - Same—Denial; hearing. 
All decisions of the governing authority either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail within ten days of the decision. Whenever the governing authority shall deny an application for a retail dealer's license, the applicant shall have fifteen days following notification of denial to request a hearing before the governing authority. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses at such hearing either with or without legal counsel. 
(Ord. of 9-10-96) 
Secs. 6-48, 6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt, beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Peach County. 
Licensee means the person whose name appears upon a retail dealer's license and shall include the business entity operating pursuant under one name. 
Licensed premises means the business location of a licensed retail dealer existing on a single contiguous tract of real estate and operating under one name. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi- public. 
Retail dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail dealer's license or license means a license to sell distilled spirits at retail for consumption on the premises, issued by the governing authority pursuant to and subject to the terms of this article. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-51. - Familiarity with article. 
It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain a copy of this article on the premises, and to instruct each employee as to the terms thereof; and each licensee and employee shall at all times be familiar with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-52. - Responsibility for acts of employees and others. 
Licensees are charged with the responsibility hereunder for compliance with this article by their officers, agents, servants and employees. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-53. - Removal of alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the promises prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverage sold pursuant to a license for sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises may be removed from the premises on which such alcoholic beverage is sold. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-54. - Construction of definitions. 
As used in this article, defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-55. - Retail dealer licenses; applications; notice; fingerprints; bonds; restrictions; standards; hearing. 
(a)  No distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be sold in Peach County except as authorized by a retail dealer's license issued pursuant to this article. Licenses issued hereunder shall authorize the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises as defined herein, only. 
(b)  Application for a retail dealer's license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority. A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official gazette of Peach County, Georgia once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the governing authority in which the application is to be acted upon. 
(c)  Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Peach County Sheriff's Department who shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for a period of five years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity. The Peach County Sheriff's Department shall also submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority considering such application. Where it appears to the governing authority that an application is complete except for the F.B.I. fingerprint report, and that the applicant otherwise qualifies for a retail dealer's license, the governing authority may grant the license contingent on receiving a satisfactory F.B.I. report. Should the report provide grounds for denying the license, the license may be revoked immediately as though the application had been denied, and the licensee shall have the right to a hearing. 
(d)  Along with their application, applicants must post with the governing authority a personal performance bond, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the governing authority in accordance with the nature of the violation after a hearing is held by the said governing authority. Written notice of such hearing shall be given to the alleged violator not less than 15 days prior thereto. The determination by the governing authority to forfeit such bond may be in addition to an action taken by the governing authority under sections 6-72 through 6-72.1. Said bond shall be payable to Peach County, Georgia in the amount of $1,000.00, said bond to be approved by the governing authority and shall be executed in the form specified by the governing authority. However, nothing herein shall preclude the governing authority waiving said bond requirement whenever a licensee has established sufficient financial responsibility and/or a record of faithful compliance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, the State of Georgia and the County of Peach. 
(e)  No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person or corporation unless such person is of legal age and such person or corporation is a resident of Peach County, Georgia or has its principal place of business located in Peach County, Georgia. 
(f)  No employee of Peach County, Georgia shall be eligible to receive a retail dealer's license. 
(g)  The following standards shall be applied to all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
(1)  All applicants for a retail dealer's license must show financial responsibility. The governing authority may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. 
(2)  All applicants for a retail dealer's license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(3)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with federal, state of [or] the laws of Peach County, Georgia. Furthermore, no license shall be granted if any operators, managers, clerks, or other employees employed by the applicant has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violators if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with federal, state or the laws of Peach County, Georgia. 
(4)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for a retail dealer's license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(5)  The governing authority, in their discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in the governing authority's sole judgment, circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(h)  All decisions of the governing authority either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail within ten days of the decision. 
(i)  Whenever the governing authority shall deny an application for a retail dealer's license, the applicant shall have 15 days following notification of denial to request a hearing before the governing authority. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses at such hearing either with or without legal counsel. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-56. - Premises. 
No retail dealer's license for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit for a building to be built or renovated are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of Peach County, Georgia, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner and the laws of the State of Georgia. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector for Peach County. Each such building shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail dealer's license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. A separate retail dealer's license shall be required for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-57. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location, including parking lot, is situated not less than 100 yards from any church building, not less than 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center, the same to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a retail dealer's license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church building, school ground or campus, or alcohol rehabilitation center, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(b)  Nevertheless, a license may be issued to any hotel, motel, or similar establishment; to any bona fide private club generally recognized as such and having bona fide membership requirements; or to any bona fide restaurant or other bona fide food service establishment, the distance between any such place and a church, library, branch, school ground or college campus notwithstanding. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-58. - Term of license; renewal. 
(a)  A retail dealer's license for sale of distilled spirits on the premises shall be valid only for the 12-month period from the date of issuance and no license may be renewed except upon approval of the governing authority. A licensee who desires to continue to operate during a subsequent year must apply for renewal prior to the expiration of his or her current license. An application for renewal is subject to the requirements of [sections] 6-76 through 6-78. 
(b)  The issuance of a license under this article for any calendar year or any portion thereof shall not be deemed to vest the licensee or any person having an interest in the business with any right to renewal thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-59. - License fees. 
The fee for each retail dealer's license for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall be as established by the county commission per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application, and shall be either a bank certified check or money order. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-60. - Place of sale of delivery of goods. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any distilled spirits for consumption on the premises to any person except in the licensed premises except as exempted under paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Open area sales and outdoor special events. 
(1)  Sales of distilled spirits can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in an open area type environment or by a licensed caterer with a catering off-premises license at an outdoor special event if the establishment or event has been approved by the county marshal. 
(2)  The open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. 
a.  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of four feet above the floor or ground. It must be approved by the county building inspector and the county fire department as required by governing regulations and codes. 
b.  The only exit from the area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit. 
(3)  An outdoor special event must be enclosed by some structure or fencing providing for public ingress/egress only through designated entrances and exits. 
a.  The outdoor special event must be approved by the county marshal and the Peach County Sheriff on crowd control, traffic, and security measures. 
b.  The event location must be properly zoned and approved by the Peach County Zoning Department. 
(c)  Promotion and sales. 
(1)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall: 
a.  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewery, winery, or distillery from distributing free samples in accordance with state law provisions; 
b.  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time; however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brew pub from offering a sampler of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces. Each sampler shall not exceed four different types of beverages. 
c.  The county marshal and the sheriff shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-61. - Hours of operation. 
No person, knowingly and intentionally, shall sell or offer to sell alcoholic beverages on: 
(1)  Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight; or 
(2)  Election days. Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on election days as the same are defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(3)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-62. - Minimum age of consumption; exceptions. 
No retail dealer or employee of a retail dealer shall knowingly furnish, sell or offer for sale any distilled spirits to a person prohibited to purchase distilled spirits under state law. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-63. - Employment of persons under 21 years of age prohibited. 
No licensee shall employ, require, or permit a person under 21 years of age to sell or take orders for any distilled spirits. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-64. - Furnishing distilled spirits to certain persons prohibited. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell, or offer to sell any distilled spirits to any person who the licensee knows or reasonably should know is intoxicated, or is of unsound mine, or is a habitual drunkard. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-65. - Retail dealers to buy only from licensed wholesalers. 
No licensee shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way effect the transfer of any distilled spirits except from a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-66. - Retail dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of distilled spirits at any place except the licensed premises, and within the licensed premises the storage area for distilled spirits shall be immediately adjacent to the retail area. No licensee shall enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by the licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-67. - Transfers and assignments. 
Alcoholic beverage licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable or assignable to new owners, but where there is a change in the ownership of a business, the new owner or owners shall file an application as for a new license as provided by this article. Changes of business interests from one party at interest named in the original application to another party at interest named in the original application and changes from one employee or manager of a social club to his successor shall not be deemed a transfer of a license. In each instance, however, the licensee shall notify the board of commissioners in writing of such change and make a complete disclosure of all of the facts in connection therewith, such notification to be made within three days from the date of such change. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-68. - Display of license. 
Licenses issued under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-69. - Licensees to maintain a copy of the article; employees to be familiar with terms; responsibility of licensee for violations. 
Each licensee shall keep a copy of this article in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof and each licensee and the licensee's agents and employees selling distilled spirits or wine shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The acts of any person working in the licensed premises which occur on the licensed premises and are in violation of this article or of any federal, state or local law relating to the sale, regulation or control of alcoholic beverages or to drugs or gambling shall be attributable to the licensee for the purposes of enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-70. - Premises open for inspection. 
The licensed premises shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers or officials representing the governing authority authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-71. - Gambling on premises prohibited. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games or chance, punch-board, slot machines, pin-ball machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed under this article, or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or controlled by an licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-72. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation, as the governing authority sees fit, of a license: 
(1)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which shall be later found to be false; 
(2)  Violation of any of the terms of this article; 
(3)  With respect to the licensee or any person with an ownership interest in the licensed premises, the violation of any federal, state or local law relating to the sale, control or regulation of alcoholic beverages, drugs, gambling, or taxation; 
(4)  Failure to maintain adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or default on any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to Peach County, Georgia; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license, which shall automatically operate to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-72.1. - Suspension and revocation—Procedure; hearing. 
Any action taken by the governing authority to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and ordinances of Peach County, the State of Georgia, or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the governing authority to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the governing authority shall provide written notice to the licensee within ten days of such action, said notice stating the action taken and the reasons therefor. The licensee shall have 15 days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the governing authority, which hearing shall be held within 30 days of such request. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and to examine opposing witnesses either with or without counsel. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-73. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-74. - Multiple locations; separate license required. 
Each license issued hereunder shall authorize the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at one licensed premises only. A person selling alcoholic beverages at more than one licensed premises must obtain a separate license for each location. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-75. - Operation in accordance with law. 
Licensees shall operate in accordance with the terms of this article and with all applicable federal and state law related to the regulation of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. 3-3-1 et seq. The term "licensee" as used in this part includes agents and employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-76. - License issuance; application procedure. 
(a)  Application. Application for a retail dealer's license shall be made on forms furnished by the governing authority. Applications shall be made in the name of a natural person and shall include the name of the business entity which will operate pursuant to the license, and the names of all individuals holding an ownership interest in the business entity. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for each retail dealer's license for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall be as established by the county commission per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application, and shall be either a bank certified check or money order. 
(c)  Background investigation. Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Peach County Sheriff's Department who shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for a period of two years immediately preceding the date of such application for any instance of criminal activity. The Peach County Sheriff's Department shall also submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority considering such application. When considering an application for renewal of a license, the governing authority may waive compliance with all or any part of this paragraph. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012; Ord. of 8-12-14) 
Sec. 6-77. - Same—Standards for granting and renewing licenses. 
(a)  Financial responsibility. All applicants for a retail dealer's license must show financial responsibility. The governing authority may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. An application may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial resources to direct and manage the affairs of the business. 
(b)  Legal age. The applicant must be at least 21 years of age. 
(c)  County employees ineligible. No employee of Peach County, Georgia shall be eligible to receive a retail dealer's license. 
(d)  Violation of laws. No retail dealer's license shall be granted or renewed where the individual applicant, or any individual with an ownership interest in the business entity which will operate pursuant to the license, has been convicted or, or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, any crime related to the sale or regulation of alcoholic beverages, gambling, drugs, or tax law violations, within the two-year period preceding the application date. This section shall not apply to a person who has previously had his or her license revoked by the governing authority. 
(e)  Prior revocation. No person whose retail dealer's license has been revoked by the governing authority shall be granted a license for a period of 12 months from the date the revocation becomes final, or for such lesser period as the governing authority may determine in its discretion, except that no person whose license is revoked by the governing authority due to conviction of, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, a crime related to drugs, gambling, or tax law violations shall be granted a license for a period of two years from the date the revocation becomes final. No business in which any such person has an ownership interest shall be entitled to operate pursuant to a license for 12 months following the revocation of such person's license. A license revocation becomes final: 
(1)  Upon the expiration of any applicable period, as provided by this article or as allowed by law, to request a hearing or appeal with regard to the revocation decision, if no hearing or appeal is requested; or 
(2)  By a decision of the Superior Court of Peach County which has the effect of affirming a decision of the governing authority revoking a license. 
(f)  Condition of premises. No retail dealer's license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit for a building to be built or renovated are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of Peach County, Georgia, regulations of the State Revenue Commissioner and the laws of the State of Georgia. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector for Peach County. Each such building shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail dealer's license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. A separate retail dealer's license shall be required for each place of business. 
(g)  Location. No retail dealer's license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location, including parking lot, is situated not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center, and not less than 1,000 feet from any licensed adult entertainment establishment. Distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a retail dealer's license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church building, school ground or campus, alcohol rehabilitation center, or adult entertainment establishment, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-78. - Same—Temporary issuance. 
Where it appears to the governing authority that an application is complete except for the F.B.I. report as described in paragraph 6-76(c) above, and that the applicant otherwise qualifies for a retail dealer's license, the governing authority may grant the license contingent on receiving a satisfactory F.B.I. report. Should the report provide grounds for denying the license, the license may be revoked immediately as though the application had been denied, and the license shall have the right to a hearing as provided in section 6-55. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 6-79. - Same—Denial; hearing. 
All decisions of the governing authority either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by certified mail within ten days of the decision. Whenever the governing authority shall deny an application for a retail dealer's license, the applicant shall have 15 days following notification of denial to request a hearing before the governing authority. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses at such hearing either with or without legal counsel. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012) 
Chapter 8 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10; giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; keeping a gambling place, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-23; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61; authority to demolish structures in which drug crimes are being committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas". 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance; 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau, introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor shall be defined as a person who has not attained the age of 18 years; 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment; 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment; 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed; 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-2; Ord. of 6-11-96, § II; Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-32. - Findings; public purpose. 
Based on Peach County, Georgia's own experiences with establishments offering public nudity in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by Peach County, Georgia; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by citizens, law enforcement professionals and an expert in economic development, many of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in Peach County, Georgia and in other localities, at the public hearing on May 7, 1996; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before members of the Peach County Board of Commissioners on other occasions and on documentary evidence submitted to the board of commissioners, the Peach County Board of Commissioners takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the Board of Commissioners of Peach County that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The board of commissioners finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in Peach County, as well. 
Furthermore, it is the binding of the Peach County Board of Commissioners that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, peep shows, adult theaters and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
The Board of Commissioners of Peach County, Georgia, therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and playgrounds to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Peach County finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The board finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this ordinance is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-1; Ord. of 6-11-96, § I) 
Sec. 8-33. - Erotic dance establishments. 
(a)  No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employe or contract with, as a dancer, a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subsection of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-3) 
Sec. 8-34. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(d)  Contact between patrons; employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall-be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-6-8. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-4; Ord. of 6-11-96, § VIII) 
Sec. 8-35. - Prohibited conduct on premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; exception; violation. 
(a)  Prohibitions. The following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve, or dispense alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on such premises within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in connection with the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine while such person is exposing any of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined in Peach County Ordinance Regulating Adult Entertainment Establishments passed June 11, 1996, section II, paragraph (I) (section 8-31, "specified anatomical areas" of this code). 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in paragraph (1) of this section or where any person performs, or simulates the performance of, any "specified sexual activity" as defined in Peach County Ordinance Regulating Adult Entertainment Establishments passed June 11, 1996, section II paragraph (H) (section 8-31, "specified sexual activities" of this code). 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in paragraphs (1) and (2) above. 
(b)  Exception. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine. For the purposes of this section, "mainstream performance house" shall mean any establishment excluded from the definition of "adult entertainment establishment" in Peach County Ordinance Regulating Adult Entertainment Establishments passed June 11, 1996, by section II(C)(6) (section 8-31, "adult entertainment establishment, subsection (6) of this code). 
(c)  Violation. The performance of any of the acts described in subsection (a) above at any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license subject to the procedure set forth in Peach County's Ordinance to Control and Regulate the Sale and Distribution of Malt Beverages and Wine, Ordinance passed September 10, 1996, part 5, section 2 (section 6-40.1 of this code). 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(2), § 1; Ord. of 6-11-96, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-10-96, §§ 1—3) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 8-36. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-7) 
Sec. 8-37. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any services, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-8) 
Sec. 8-38. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes ("a residential area"); 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land or which a church, school, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine is located; 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-9; Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(A)) 
Sec. 8-39. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a.period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(b)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainer on a licensed premises, as defined in section 8-39(a), he or she shall file a notice with the county administrator of Peach County of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the county administrator and shall receive a permit for such employment from the county administrator. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the Peach County Sheriff's Department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his or her convictions of sex-related crimes and drug-related or alcohol-related felonies (including pleas of guilty or nolo contendere) within the past five years. The county shall have 15 days to investigate the prospective employee. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this section, then upon certification by the sheriff of Peach County that such requirements have been met, and upon payment of the permit fee, the county administrator shall issue a permit approving such employment. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the county administrator shall provide him or her the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the board of commissioners, which may uphold or reverse the decision. The annual permit fee shall be $45.00. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainer of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the board of commissioners finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the Board shall schedule a hearing to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 20 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefor. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The Board shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainers shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-10; Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(B)) 
Sec. 8-40. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-27; Ord. of 6-11-96, § IX) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 26-26 et seq. 
Sec. 8-41. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-31) 
Sec. 8-42. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county and the state. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-28; Ord. of 6-11-96, § X(A)) 
Sec. 8-43. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
The Peach County Marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-29; Ord. of 6-11-96, § X(B)) 
Sec. 8-44. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
The Peach County Sheriff's Department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-30; Ord. of 6-11-96, § X(C)) 
Sec. 8-45. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of section 8-34 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-26; Ord. of 6-11-96, § VIII) 
Sec. 8-46. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § IV) 
Sec. 8-47. - Hours of operation. 
An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(C)) 
Sec. 8-48. - Performance area. 
All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(E)) 
Sec. 8-49. - Lighting. 
All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths (3.5) foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(F)) 
Sec. 8-50. - Protected viewing. 
All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(G)) 
Sec. 8-51. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under any applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § XII) 
Secs. 8-52—8-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing of businesses generally, § 18-26 et seq. 

Sec. 8-61. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon, any premises within the unincorporated area of Peach County an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without a license to do so. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. No license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the county if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-5; Ord. of 6-11-96, § III) 
Sec. 8-62. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-6) 
Sec. 8-63. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-15) 
Sec. 8-64. - Application process and qualifications. 
Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the unincorporated areas of Peach County shall make application to the county administrator of Peach County. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by Peach County, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined herein and of the owner(s) as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $45.00 shall be paid to the county administrator to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The county administrator shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-11; Ord. of 6-11-96, V(A)) 
Sec. 8-65. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of corporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than 20 percent of the stock in the corporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the sheriff's department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(12)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the Georgia Crime Information Center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the Peach County Sheriff's Department. 
(13)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(14)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(15)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who do not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a crime or Peach County ordinance involving moral turpitude in the past five years. Peach County shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(16)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(17)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or playground, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(18)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(a)  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
(b)  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
(c)  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(d)  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-12; Ord. of 6-11-96, § V(B)) 
Sec. 8-66. - Appearance by applicant. 
The applicant shall personally appear before the county administrator and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the board of commissioners, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-13; Ord. of 6-11-96, § V(C)) 
Sec. 8-67. - Investigation; standards for granting of license. 
The county shall have 30 days to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). Upon completion of the investigation, the county administrator shall grant the license if he/she finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this ordinance; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(5)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude' in the last five years; 
(6)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other county or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(10)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any residential area, church, school, public park or playground, or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(11)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this ordinance or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of Peach County, the State of Georgia or the United States. If, after 30 days, the application is complete and in all respects conforms to the provisions of this article but the background investigation contemplated by this section is incomplete, the license shall be granted, subject to the right of the Board of Commissioners to revoke the license if the investigation reveals a criminal conviction or license denial or revocation that makes the applicant ineligible for a license. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-14; Ord. of 6-11-96, § V(D)) 
Sec. 8-68. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the county, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the county clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the county clerk. The county clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-15) 
Editor's note— The county's ordinance of September 14, 1993, contained two sections numbered 1-15. 
Sec. 8-69. - Same—Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-16) 
Sec. 8-70. - Same—Nontransferable; exception. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or moreof the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the county, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-17) 
Sec. 8-71. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the county commissioners, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the county administrator and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the county code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-18) 
Sec. 8-72. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for board of commissioners action. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-19) 
Sec. 8-73. - Same—Board of commissioners to determine procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the board of commissioners' agenda, the board of commissioners may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-20) 
Sec. 8-74. - Board of commissioners hearing. 
Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the time and date set therefor, the board of commissioners shall hear all relevant testimony and shall examine evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from county staff. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-21) 
Sec. 8-75. - Rule of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-23) 
Sec. 8-76. - Hearing officer—Powers. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-22) 
Sec. 8-77. - Same—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee or appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished the sheriff of the county. 
(b)  The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee or appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the permittee or appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-24) 
Sec. 8-78. - Same—Action by board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board of commissioners does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 9-14-93, § 1-25) 
Sec. 8-79. - Display of license. 
An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § VI(D)) 
Sec. 8-80. - Denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of section 8-67 above. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or renovation of a license: 
(i)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
(ii)  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article by an operator, owner or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to adult entertainers, while in the course and scope of his or her employment at the establishment. 
(iii)  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 8-67 above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. The board of commissioners shall provide an applicant whose license application is denied with written notice of the decision to deny and reason(s) therefor within ten days of the decision. Notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail. The applicant shall have 15 days following the receipt of such notice to request a hearing before the board of commissioners, which hearing shall be held within 30 days of such request. The applicant shall be entitled to present evidence and examine witnesses at such hearing either with or without legal counsel. The board shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall promptly notify the applicant in writing. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedures. Whenever the board finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the board shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The board shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall promptly notify the licensee in writing. Any suspension of a license under this subsection shall last 30 days from the date of the notification of the board's decision or through the end of the original term of the license, whichever is shorter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-96, § XI; Ord. of 3-10-2015) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 26-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 10-26. - Appointment of dog control officer; duties. 
The individual holding the title of county zoning enforcement officer is hereby appointed to the position of dog control officer to carry out the duties as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., entitled "Dangerous Dog Control Law." 
(Ord. of 11-5-88) 
Sec. 10-27. - Hearings; animal registration fee. 
The county board of health is hereby designated to conduct all hearings required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, and that a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be collected as an annual registration fee by the county dog control officer to register each potentially dangerous dog so classified under the dangerous dog control law. 
(Ord. of 11-5-88) 
Sec. 10-28. - Arrangements for housing; apprehension; destruction. 
The county dog control officer shall be further authorized to contract or cooperate with other governmental agencies and private veterinarians to provide for the housing, apprehension, and destruction of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs as may be required or permitted by the dangerous dog control law. Any expenditure of funds on behalf of the county by the county dog control officer for such services from other governments or private veterinarians for the housing, apprehension, and destruction of such animals shall first be approved by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88) 
Chapter 12 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; giving massage in places used for lewdness, prostitution, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charge, either directly or indirectly, refers to a salary, commission, gratuity or other remuneration as paid or made available to a massagist administering massages as a primary or incidental activity resulting from such payment; a charge, fee, dues or other payment for the purpose of receiving any service or use of an establishment which provides for the payer the opportunity to obtain a massage. 
Genitals means the external sexual organs. 
Health certificate means a certificate from a regular practicing medical doctor showing that the person named therein has been examined and is free from any infectious or communicable disease. 
Massage means the act or art of treating the human body or any part thereof by rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion or like ministrations to stimulate circulation or increase suppleness for a charge, direct or indirect. 
Massage establishment means any building, room, place or establishment where massages are practiced upon the human body for a charge, either directly or indirectly, by a person, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, whether primary or an incidental activity of the establishment in which the massage is performed. 
Massage establishment license means that document issued by the county to an establishment where massages are furnished. 
Massagist means a person who administers massages. 
Massagist license means that document issued by the county to a person who administers massages. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-2. - Limit of applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall in no way affect nor limit the provisions and requirements of the zoning ordinances of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-3. - Inspections. 
The county shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter in any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The county shall also have authority to direct that the health officer or official of the county shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the sanitary conditions of any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The inspections may be made at any time during which a massage establishment is open for business pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-4. - Violations; penalty. 
The operation of any business, administration of any massage, use of any license issued pursuant to this chapter contrary to any provision of this chapter or the failure to comply with any provision of this chapter: 
(1)  Shall, if continued, be deemed and considered a nuisance; 
(2)  Shall be subject to any other provision for suspension, revocation or denial as provided herein and any other civil or criminal action or penalty or proceeding provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-5. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or licensed vocational or practical nurse acting at the direction of a doctor; nor a duly licensed establishment wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor and which operate only under the licensed party's direction; nor shall it apply to athletic trainers of a bona fide athletic team when the trainers are massaging members of the team, nor to a duly licensed hospital or medical clinic. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Secs. 12-6—12-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-24. - Issuance procedures. 
Following the submission of an application for a license as provided in this chapter, either for an initial or renewal license, the following procedure or requirement shall apply thereto in addition to those elsewhere specified in this chapter. 
(1)  Investigation and inquiry. Any investigation or inquiry pertaining to the information provided on the license application as may be considered reasonable and necessary shall be made by the county. The investigation and inquiry shall be concluded within 15 days of the filing of the application for a license except that if for any reason the investigation or inquiry is not concluded, the county shall so notify the applicant of that situation. The notice shall specify a reasonable period within which the county expects to conclude the investigation and inquiry, the reasonable period not to exceed an additional 30 days. 
(2)  Failure to obtain information. Upon the expiration of the period above specified or as extended, if the county is unable to conclude the investigation and inquiry by reason of inability to obtain information, the applicant shall be so notified in writing by the county and given a period not to exceed 15 days during which the applicant may provide the information to the county may consider accurate and complete. Upon the failure to obtain the information or to confirm the accuracy or completeness of the same, the county shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. 
(3)  False or deficient information. If upon concluding the review, investigation and inquiry of the application and the applicant, the county determines that any information provided in the application is false or that the information provided in the application or as determined by the county upon its investigation and inquiry the following facts are found to exist, the county shall not issue a license to the applicant: 
a.  The health certificate required for any massagist and attached to an application is absent. 
b.  Any massagist employed or to be employed in any massage establishment does not have a license as required by this article and has not submitted application for the same prior to the filing of an application for a massage establishment license by the applicant therefor. 
c.  A massagist does not hold the qualifications specified by evidence of a diploma or training and experience as provided for and being a requirement of the issuance of a massagist license. 
d.  The applicant, if an individual, for any license required by this article or any person or entity owning and/or controlling the applicant including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation, an officer, director or shareholder holding at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation has been convicted of any violation of this article within the 12 months preceding the date of the filing of the application or any offense specified in subsection 12-52(10) or of subsection 12-72(2)i. of this chapter. 
e.  The applicant has previously had a license required by this chapter revoked, or is at the time of filing an application for a license, presently holding a license which is under suspension pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  Notice of refusal. Upon refusal to issue a license as above provided, the county shall give to the applicant notice which shall contain the reasons for failure to issue the license. 
(5)  Appeal petition. The applicant may within 30 days of the date of the notice petition to the board of commissioners for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a license shall be granted to the applicant. The hearing shall be scheduled and conducted at any regular or special meeting of board of commissioners to be held within 30 days of the date the petition is filed and with written notice to the applicant of the time, date and place of the hearing unless postponed with the consent of the applicant or by motion adopted at meeting of council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-25. - Fees. 
The fees or charges for the licenses required pursuant to this article shall be specified in the annual ordinance to assess and levy taxes and raise revenues for the county (known as the license and tax ordinance of the county) and shall be subject to the provisions thereof as to the requirements for the payment and collection of the same; provided that where there is any conflict between the language of that ordinance and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Fees for business license under two employees is $294.00 and each additional employee is $118.00. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-26. - License; duration, display, assignability. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid, except as otherwise provided herein, from the date of issuance through December 31 of the year in which the license is issued. Any license obtained, as required by this article, shall be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment. Any license issued pursuant to this article shall not be assignable to any other person, firm, corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-27. - Suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation subject to the following violations and procedures: 
(1)  Grounds for suspension. The county may suspend a license issued to and held by a massage establishment or a massagist upon any of the following grounds: 
a.  A massagist who has an infectious or communicable disease has administered a massage. 
b.  Any massagist and/or any massagist employed by a massage establishment or any party specified in subsection 12-52(9) has been convicted of any violation of this chapter or crime specified in subsection 12-52(10) or subsection 12-72(2)i. 
c.  Any massagist has violated or permitted to be violated any provision of section 12-71 or any provision of article III of this chapter. 
d.  Suspension duration. The county shall have authority to suspend a license for a period of from one day to 90 days for each occasion upon which one of the grounds for suspension as above set forth has occurred. The suspension shall be effective from the time specified or during the period specified pursuant to a hearing as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(2)  Special suspension. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the county shall have authority to suspend a license instantly without hearing, to be effective until a hearing as herein provided, whenever any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter: 
a.  Shall have violated any provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above on more than one occasion or occurrence prior to a hearing as specified herein; or 
b.  A hearing as specified herein is not held as scheduled by reason of postponement of the same by the holder of the license. 
(3)  Grounds for revocation. The county may revoke a license issued pursuant to this article for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Whenever in the judgment of the board of commissioners of the county any holder of a license has violated a provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) above, the violation is of sufficient excess, neglect or aggravation as to require revocation rather than suspension or upon a judgment that the violation of this article is continuous. 
b.  That the holder of a license issued pursuant to this article has had the license suspended on more than one occasion during any calendar year wherein revocation of the license shall be automatic. 
(4)  Proceedings. Any proceeding for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be pursuant to the following procedures: 
a.  Notice of the proceeding to be recommended or pursued by the county shall be given to the holder of the license specifying the proceeding recommended or to be pursued and the reason therefor pursuant to subsection (1) above. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of hearing on the matter at a regular or special meeting of board of commissioners and, if the provisions of subsection (3) above are being followed, a statement that the license is suspended from the time of service of the notice until the hearing. 
b.  The hearing as specified herein shall be held within 30 days of the date of the notice being served upon the holder of the license unless postponed with the consent of the holder of the license or by motion adopted at the meeting of council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
c.  At the hearing the holder of the license shall be required to present the license to the county prior to being heard at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing the license shall either be marked "revoked" or "suspended" with the period of suspension specified thereon or returned to the holder if no action of suspension or revocation is effected. 
d.  Subsequent to any action of suspension or revocation as provided herein, the county shall have authority to place one or more notices upon any massage establishment in a conspicuous place or places that the license issued to that establishment has been suspended or revoked and that the same is not open for the business of providing massages without the establishment holding a valid license issued pursuant to this article. In the event that the holder of a license fails to deliver the same to the county as regulated herein or upon the license being suspended pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the county shall have the authority to take possession of the license from the holder. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Secs. 12-28—12-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-51. - License required. 
No license to engage in the business of operating a massage establishment shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the county clerk and no massage establishment shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the county until the license has been issued. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-52. - Application. 
The county administrator shall provide, to an applicant for a massage establishment license, a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the county administrator by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
(1)  The kind of business to be operated. 
(2)  The name of the business. 
(3)  The location where the business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number at the location. 
(4)  The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the date upon which the corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the state; the name of its registered agent; the address of its registered office if the same is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the name, home addresses and home telephone numbers of all persons having an ownership interest in the business. Also, an applicant for a massage establishment license shall submit his/her date of birth, sex and race on the application. 
(5)  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the 90 days preceding the date of the application. 
(6)  The home address of the applicant and telephone number and the length at which the applicant has been a resident of the address. 
(7)  The social security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant. 
(8)  The names and addresses of all massagists to be employed or presently employed by the applicant with a health certificate as defined in this article issued not less than 15 days prior to submitting the application to be attached to that application for each listed massagist. 
(9)  Names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning and/or controlling the applicant, including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers and also if the applicant is a corporation then the officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation. 
(10)  Disclosure as to all employees of the applicant and any and all partners, managers or principals of the applicant and also in the event the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors or stockholders holding ten percent or more of the capital stock of the applicant specifying all final convictions occurring within five years of the date of the application of any federal or state offense which is a felony or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery or masturbation for hire. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
(11)  The applicant shall acknowledge that pursuant to this chapter the county shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if the inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of the information, the county has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the person about whom the information is disputed, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the county upon the request of that official prior to that official making a final decision as to approving or denying the license. 
(12)  The names and residential telephone numbers and addresses for the last year of all proposed or present employees of the massage establishment for which the application is being made. 
(13)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massage establishment will be located so that the party may be located if necessary by any county employee or official during day or evening hours. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-53. - Change of information. 
The holder of any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall within seven days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided in subsection 12-52(8), (9) and (10) shall transmit the same in writing to the county administrator. The transmittal shall specify the changed information in accordance with such provisions in the same manner as if the information was specified in a license application. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-54. - Separate locations. 
The license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only at the location specified in the license as issued. Any change in the location of the massage establishment other than by ceasing business at a location shall require the filing of an application for a license pursuant to the requirements of this division. In the event the application is filed for the purpose of changing the location of the massage establishment, without adding thereto any total number of locations in excess of those for which the applicant presently holds a license, no additional license fee for the calendar year in which the massage establishment holds a valid license pursuant to this section shall be charged except that the county marshal may impose a processing charge of $25.00 per application in such event. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Secs. 12-55—12-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGISTS 

Sec. 12-71. - License—Required. 
No massage shall be administered by a person who does not have a current valid massagist license. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-72. - Same—Application. 
Licensing and application procedures for massagists shall be as follows: 
(1)  No license to engage in the business of administering massages shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the county administrator, and no massagist shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the county until the license has been issued. 
(2)  The county administrator shall provide to an applicant for a massagist license, a form containing the information as hereinafter specified which shall be completed and filed with the county administrator by each applicant for such license to be accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of license requested. 
b.  The name of the applicant. 
c.  The location where the applicant proposes to administer massages and solicit patrons and the telephone number at the location. If the applicant intends to engage in business or administer massages at more than one location, the addresses of the additional locations shall be specified if the applicant intends to or has previously administered massages at such locations on more than two occasions during a calendar year. If the applicant intends to administer a massage at locations to be identified by patrons which are presently unknown to the application, a specific statement to that effect shall be set forth. 
d.  The legal name of the applicant for the license and the applicant's date of birth, sex and race. 
e.  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the 90 days preceding the date of the application including the current home address of the applicant, his telephone number and the length of time the applicant has been a resident of the address. 
f.  A health certificate as defined in this article issued not less than 15 days prior to submitting the application to be attached to the application. 
g.  The social security number of the applicant. 
h.  The names and addresses of all massage establishments in which the applicant has been employed for the preceding two years. 
i.  Disclosure as to the applicant of all final convictions occurring within five years of the date of the application of any federal or state offense which is a felony or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy or lewd house, keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, assault or battery or masturbation for hire. If such a conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
j.  The applicant shall acknowledge that pursuant to this article, the county shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information above provided and that if the inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of the information, the county has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the applicant, and the applicant shall be required to provide such to the county upon the request of the county prior to making a final decision as to approving or denying the license. 
k.  The name, address and telephone number of the real property on which the massages will be administered if the information provided in subsection c. above is not a massage establishment so that the party may be located if necessary by any county employee or official during day or evening hours. 
l.  A photostatic copy of a diploma of graduation from a school as an exhibit attached to the application. The diploma must be representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six months, wherein the course of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene. In the event the applicant should not have such diploma, then the applicant must attach a transcript from an accredited educational institution demonstrating the completion, with passing grades, of courses of instruction of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene or must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years in a regularly licensed massage or physical culture establishment in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene; the application to specify the name and address of the establishments from which the applicant has obtained the training and experience with the periods during which the training was received and the specification of the nature of the training. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-73. - Supervenient regulations. 
Any massagist administering a massage pursuant to a license issued as required by this chapter shall comply with the substantive provisions and regulations of sections 12-94, 12-96 and 12-97. Any reference in such section to a massage establishment shall apply to the massagist in the manner of conduct or performance in the administration of any massage. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-74. - Change of information. 
The holder of any license issued pursuant to this division shall, within seven days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided, be transmitted in writing to the county. The transmittal shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of the subsections in the same manner as if the information was specified in a license application. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-75. - Group license prohibited. 
A license as provided for in this division shall be issued only to an individual. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Secs. 12-76—12-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 12-93. - Compliance. 
Any massage establishment in operation pursuant to a license issued as required by this chapter shall comply with the provisions and regulations in this article in the conduct and operation of its business. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-94. - Prohibitions generally; exemption. 
(a)  No person shall receive a massage unless the patron is covered by opaque material such as a towel or shorts covering the hips, genitals and anal areas. No massagist shall touch the genitals or anal area of any patron or the breast if the patron is a female, nor shall a patron touch the genitals or anal area of a massagist, and if the massagist is a female, the prohibited area shall include the breast. 
(b)  No massage shall be administered to any person who is a minor as defined by state law. 
(c)  In the administration of any massage, the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not be applicable to any person for whom a massage is ordered upon the written certificate of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor; provided that such certificate shall be signed by the physician, osteopath or chiropractor, be dated, shall specifically state the number of treatments recommended therein and further that the date and hour of each treatment given pursuant to the certificate, the name of the massagist giving the treatment, and the name of the patron receiving the treatment shall be maintained in a record to be preserved by the owner or operator of the massage establishment for a period of two years and shall be available for inspection by the county or its designated representative. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-95. - Hours. 
No massage establishment shall be open for the business of providing massages during any day prior to 8:30 a.m. and subsequent to 12:00 midnight Eastern Standard Time or such other daylight or standard time as may be applicable to the geographical territory of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-96. - Sanitary conditions. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before using the same upon another. No towels and linens shall be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. All massagists shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No person suffering from an infectious or communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or any employee, the person is suffering from an infectious or communicable disease. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Sec. 12-97. - Off-premises massage restricted; record. 
No massage establishment nor any massagist shall either arrange for or conduct the administration of a massage under the license applicable to the party except upon the premises of the massage establishment and at the location specified in the application for the license unless, within the application, information is specifically set forth that it is the intention of the holder of the license to administer massages or arrange for the same at unspecified locations within the county and, in such event, the holder of the license shall maintain records subject to the same provisions as in this article above which shall specify as to each massage so arranged or conducted, the name, residential address, and telephone number of the person receiving the massage; the date, hour and place at which such massage was administered. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2010) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; dangerous and unfit buildings or structures, § 26-36 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 26-71 et seq.; floods, ch. 27; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30; planning, ch. 34; vegetation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Road numbers established; posting of house numbers. 
(a)  The official names of roads for the unincorporated areas of Peach County shall be those names established by the Board of Commissioners of Peach County as attached hereto and made a part hereof. Names of such roads may be changed only by action of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  All owners of residences in the unincorporated areas of Peach County are required, on or before July 1, 1999, to post their assigned house numbers on their mailbox in numbers at least three inches in height. If the property owner has no mailbox on the premises, that owner shall post house numbers of at least three inches in height on a post of sufficient height and proximity to the public road for the numbers to be recognizable from the public road. 
(c)  Violations of this section may be punishable by jail terms not to exceed 30 days and a fine not to exceed $500.00 
(Ord. of 3-30-99) 
Editor's note— Said list of road names is not set out herein, but is available for inspection in the offices of the county. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, § 22-26 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30. 
Secs. 14-2—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 14-26. - Adoption. 
The following technical building and construction codes as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 are adopted by reference as the official codes of the county and may be amended for later editions as required by the state uniform codes act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  The International Building Code; 
(2)  The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings; 
(3)  The International Mechanical Code; 
(4)  The International Fuel Gas Code; 
(5)  The International Plumbing Code; 
(6)  The International Fire Code; 
(7)  The National Electric Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association; 
(8)  The International Energy Conservation Code; 
(9)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; 
(10)  The International Existing Building Code. 
(Ord. of 1-14-2017) 
Secs. 14-27—14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 14-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-47. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the county. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the county. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the county municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 6) 
Sec. 14-48. - Construction of residential buildings with certain plumbing prohibited. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the unincorporated limits of the county, for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be applicable to one piece toilets until July 1, 1992. 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure. 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush. 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 2) 
Sec. 14-49. - Construction of commercial buildings with certain plumbing prohibited. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the unincorporated limits of the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (5) of section 14-48. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 3) 
Sec. 14-50. - Application of section 14-48. 
The requirements of section 14-48 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building, when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers, or both. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 4) 
Sec. 14-51. - Exemptions; obtaining exemptions; fees. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 14-47, 14-49 and 14-50 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the county. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 2-12-91, § 5) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; adult entertainment, § 8-30 et seq.; planning, ch. 34; taxation, ch. 42; hotel-motel excise tax, § 42-71 et seq.; occupation tax, § 42-111 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— A schedule of business license fees and taxes to be levied and collected in the unincorporated area of the county is compiled and published separately by the county. An official copy of such schedule is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Licensing of adult entertainment establishments, § 18-60 et seq. 
Specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-26. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Nonpayment of license fees. All persons entitled to have a license issued to them under the provisions of this article who do not pay the fees by February 1 of each year, shall be guilty of doing business without a license, and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by section 1-11. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of article. It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license shall be granted under the provisions of this article to do any of the acts forbidden by this article, or to fail to do any of the things required to be done by the terms of this article. It shall be unlawful for any persons to whom a license shall be granted to violate the terms of this article, and violators shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  Penalty for failure to timely obtain a license. In addition to all other penalties provided in this section, any person failing to obtain a license within 30 days from the time he first engages in such business during the calendar year shall pay a penalty of 25 percent of the scheduled amount of the license fee, which shall be added to the scheduled amount of the license fee. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-27. - Registration. 
(a)  Required annually. Every person who exercises or may exercise within the unincorporated area of the county any profession, trade, calling, or business, of any nature whatever, shall annually register such profession, trade, calling or business with the county commissioners' office. This registration must be done by January 30 in each year. Any person who begins business for a trade or a profession in the unincorporated area of the county after January 30 in any year shall register their name and business as provided in this section. 
(b)  Requirement for persons with no fixed places of business; tax. Whenever any person having no fixed place of business within the unincorporated area of the county shall nevertheless exercise within the unincorporated area of the county any business of any nature whatever, such person is required to register his name and business and be subjected to the same or like taxation on his business as is levied by the board of commissioners upon persons following a like business and having a fixed place of business. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-28. - Tax imposed on all businesses by board of commissioners. 
Any business, trade, profession or calling upon which no license or tax is specifically imposed by the provisions of this article shall pay a license or tax to be fixed by the board of commissioners in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-29. - Business in which license fees based on inventory; affidavit; intentional inaccuracy cause for revocation of license. 
Each person operating a business in which their license fee is based on stock or inventory shall furnish the commissioners' office on or before January 30 in each year, an affidavit stating the average cost value of stock carried during the preceding year and estimate of the average cost value of stock to be carried during the current year. If no business was operated during the preceding year, only an estimate to the current year shall be included. The affidavit shall further list such additional lines of business to be engaged in by the affidavit in connection with the business described in this classification. The intentional inaccuracy of the information contained in such affidavit is cause for the revocation of the license or the assessment of 25 percent of the regular license fee attaching to the classification in which the particular business falls, whichever may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-30. - Advertisement of business creates liability for license; license issued to person applying; due date of business license tax; expiry of license; clearance of zoning office. 
(a)  Any person advertising by signs, cards, circulars, newspaper advertising, or otherwise that he is in a business of any kind shall be held liable for the license required for such business. 
(b)  Each license shall be in the name of the person to which the license is issued, and each tax levied by this article shall be due and payable on January 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided, and the license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  All business license applicants must clear the zoning office prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-31. - Posting of license. 
Each license shall be posted conspicuously at or in the place of business or the person taking out such license. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-32. - Determination of graduated tax based on stock value. 
Whenever in this article a license, business or other tax is a graduated one based upon the value of stock, the word stock shall be deemed to mean the average stock on hand for the entire calendar year preceding for which the tax is levied. If the taxpayer was not in business during the entire preceding year, then the average shall be computed for the time the taxpayer was in business. If a business is begun after January 1 of the year for which the tax was levied, the value of the stock shall be determined as of the date of commencing business. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-33. - Classification of licensed applicant's business. 
(a)  Oath required. In all cases the person applying for a license shall make oath, when required to do so, that the business conducted by the applicant falls within the class to which the ordinance fixing the tax specifically applies. Such licenses are imposed upon each separate business and apply only to that particular business and do not include any other business for which a specific license is required. 
(b)  Number of employees. In determining the number of employees connected with a business, the owners, officers, or proprietors giving their personal attention to the business shall be considered employees for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-34. - Examination of taxpayer's books to determine compliance. 
Whenever in order to ensure the proper collection of the licenses and taxes imposed and levied by this article, it is necessary to examine the books of the taxpayer to determine his compliance with the article, it shall be lawful for any authorized representative of the county to examine the books and records of any taxpayer whose books and records are necessary to such determination. Each taxpayer affected hereby shall allow reasonable access to such books and records, upon demand, and, upon failure to do so, shall be subject to the penal provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-35. - Payment of business license taxes. 
(a)  License, occupation, and specific taxes are levied annually, unless otherwise provided for, except that when a business begins operation after January 1, the tax shall be due and payable when the business commences. Fees for licenses issued after July 1 shall be one-half the annual prescribed rate. 
(b)  Licenses and taxes levied and collected under any of the sections of this article shall be payable in United States currency or coupons of bonds, as provided in the act authorizing the issue of the bonds. 
(c)  If any license or tax, or any part thereof imposed in this article, shall be judged invalid for any reason, or any person engaging in the business or occupation falling under such invalid license, or tax or part thereof, who has not paid his license or tax imposed in this article, shall be liable and shall pay to the county the same license or tax paid for the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-36. - Transferability of license. 
No license is transferable for the person to whom it is issued, except by the payment of a fee amounting to ten percent of the cost of such license. No business shall change location without the approval of the county commissioners' office. This shall not include an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-37. - Separate license and fees for each business location. 
Where a person conducts a business at more than one store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this article, and a separate business license fee or occupation tax shall be levied and paid. Should more than one business on which a business license fee or occupation tax is levied by this article be conducted in or in conjunction with one place or kind of business, each business shall be subject to a separate business license fee or occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-38. - Disabled veteran's exemption. 
As provided by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, an application for an exemption from the license fee must include a certificate of exemption issued by the commissioner of veterans service establishing the applicant's disabled veteran status. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-39. - Issuance of license conditioned on payment of past license fees. 
A condition to the issuance of any license shall be payment by the applicant of all past due licenses. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Sec. 18-40. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 1-1-93) 
Secs. 18-41—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FORTUNETELLERS AND PALM READERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of county governing authority as to fortunetelling, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 

Sec. 18-61. - Tax required to practice. 
No one may practice fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practices, businesses or professions within the county, outside the corporate limits of municipalities, without first paying to the clerk of the county commissioners a fee as set forth in the schedule of business license fees and taxes for each year that a person practices such fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practices, businesses or professions within the county outside the corporate limits of municipalities. 
(Res. of 7-13-76) 
Secs. 18-62—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKYARDS AND SALVAGE OPERATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 38; vegetation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq. 

Sec. 18-81. - Operational requirements. 
The following operational requirements relating to junkyards and auto salvage yards shall be observed: 
(1)  All junkyard and salvage operations shall be completely enclosed by a buffer or wall which limits visibility into the area to ten percent, having a minimum height of six feet, but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view. Driveways shall be enclosed with gates which screen from view all storage of junk in the area. 
(2)  The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to one per 500 feet with a minimum of 30 feet driveway width. 
(3)  All salvageable parts stored on dirt shall be racked at least 18 inches above ground in neat racks, to prevent rats from harboring under scrap. The area under the racks shall be cleaned by mowing or raking. 
(4)  Any scrap left after salvaging parts shall be removed from the premises and not allowed to accumulate and rust away. 
(5)  Any building used to store parts or dismantle parts shall be completely enclosed if in front of the screen. No wrecks shall be allowed to be parked outside the screened area. 
(6)  Used cars held for sale must be in running order and moved out within six months. Any such used car lot shall be fenced with a six-inch woven wire fence, and screened from any adjoining residential district. 
(7)  Only one caretaker's residence or mobile home shall be allowed on any one salvage yard. 
(8)  Any application for a certificate of occupancy for a salvage business shall contain the requirements of section 112.1 of the county comprehensive land development resolution and a plan showing screening and the effective dates that the screening shall be such that all operations will be hid from view, and the type of screening proposed, together with a topographical survey of the land so that the drainage capabilities may be determined. 
(9)  No junkyard or auto salvage yard shall be permitted to locate closer than 300 feet to a residence and no closer than 50 feet to any one or rear line, or closer than 200 feet to any county road, except for completely enclosed buildings. 
(10)  Junkyards and auto salvage operations may be located only in M-2, RAG and RR-1 areas as defined in the county comprehensive land development resolution. 
(Ord. of 5-10-77) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 2-14-2012, §§ 2—7, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as superseding former Art. II is at the editor's discretion. Former Art. II, §§ 22-26—22-35, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original codification, as amended by Ord. of 7-11-06[1]; Ord. of 7-11-06(2); Ord. of 7-11-06(3); Ord. of 7-11-06(4). 

Sec. 22-26. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the chair of the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for Peach County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chair may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chair finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chair shall execute and file with the clerk of the board of commissioners a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chair. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chair shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Peach County Emergency Management Agency ("EMA") Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including the implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
3.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chair is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chair may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 22-29 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 22-30 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 22-28 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The chair of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
4.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
5.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
6.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
7.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
8.  To suspend any law, Code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulation of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
9.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
10.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, Peach County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date] ; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chair of the Peach County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the Peach County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Peach County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the Peach County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the Peach County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 22-29, Registration of Building and Repair Services, to be effective only if the Governor has declared a state of emergency; and/or Section 22-30, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews] ; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 22-26(a)(4)c. or d., or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date] 
[Signed]            Chair, Peach County Board of Commissioners" 
(c)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the county's emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the board of commissioners may contract with any municipality for the administration of an emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 22-27. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the Peach County Sheriff's Office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chair or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chair or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, Code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this ordinance may be enforced by the sheriff's office, the EMA director and county marshal. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 3) 
Sec. 22-28. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. [Note: Local legislation should be reviewed to determine whether there are restrictions upon moving the meeting location if it is only a locally declared emergency and not a state of emergency declared by the governor.] 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chair of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and development services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of a continuing hardship, and in the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of up to an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 22-29. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the Peach County Building Inspector and the Peach County Planning and Zoning Department and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $100.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the secretary of state, if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon a declaration of emergency by the governor and a local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 22-30. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chair until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chair shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chair shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the county emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through the county emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMA, the director of public safety and/or the sheriff of the county. 
(e)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(f)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 6) 
Sec. 22-31. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2012, § 7) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; floods, ch. 27; planning, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 38; vegetation, ch. 50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Unlawful operation of adult entertainment establishments declared nuisance, § 8-40; animals, ch. 10; solid waste, ch. 38; vegetation, ch. 50. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-26—26-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS AND UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-36. - Findings of fact and applicability. 
(a)  It is found and declared that in the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state. A public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this county and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the board of commissioners find that there exist in the unincorporated areas of the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, the county commission should exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this division. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article including method and procedure may also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property is in violation of this article. 
(c)  The exercise of powers by the county described in this article shall be limited to properties located in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Sec. 26-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any buildings or structures of any design. 
Governing body means the Board of Commissioners of Peach County, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city in Peach County, Georgia. 
Ordinance or division means the provisions of this division and the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of the property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have an interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public officer means the building inspector of the county or any other officer who is authorized by this division to exercise the powers prescribed by the division, or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-38. - Complaint; notice; hearing. 
Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the public officer, on his own motion, that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a place within the city, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
Sec. 26-39. - Determination; order to abate. 
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
In no event shall the board of commissioners require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
Sec. 26-40. - Failure to comply with order; placard. 
If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
Sec. 26-41. - Removal or demolition. 
If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the public officer, set forth in section 26-40 and in this section, shall not be exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in this ordinance. 
Sec. 26-42. - Costs shall be lien. 
The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk of the governing body of the county on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, building, or structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the county superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
Sec. 26-43. - Lien enforcement. 
The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county in ten biannual payments, interest free, but with an administrative fee of $125.00 for each installment, for a period not to exceed five years. Payments will be due on March 1 and September 1 of each year. In the event the owner becomes delinquent by two payments, the entire balance shall be due and payable to Peach County immediately. All payments shall be made as scheduled to the Peach County Board of Commissioners. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien attaches be sold, transferred, pledged as security, or conveyed by the owner or parties ln interest at any time prior to the termination of the five year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county immediately; and 
(3)  Should the amount due upon such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the five year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et. seq. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2018) 
Sec. 26-44. - Conditions for determination of unfitness. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the generality of the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
Sec. 26-45. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this division, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 26-46. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this division shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest. The return of service shall be signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizens of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaints or orders was served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, and shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the county, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaints or orders to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party, or such service may be made by any citizen. The return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such party was served, either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaints or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the complaints or orders once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county or, in the absence of such newspaper in the county, in one printed and published outside the county and circulated in the county in which the dwellings, buildings, or structures are located. A copy of such complaints or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaints or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaints or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided in this section. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative, or if such minor or insane person lives outside of the county or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the county or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the county probate court, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaints or orders upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person holding himself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaints or orders shall be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county, and such filing of the complaints or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaints or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of the county commission. 
Sec. 26-47. - Injunctions against order to repair, close, or demolish. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the county superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order. The court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
Sec. 26-48. - Taking by eminent domain; police power. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
Sec. 26-49. - Authority to use revenues, grants, and donations to repair, close, or demolish. 
The county may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 26-50. - Construction of this division with other laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this division shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
Secs. 26-51—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 9-14-2010, effective 10-1-2010, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 26-71—26-80, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 6-8-04; Ord. of 4-27-90. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; solid waste, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. Paragraph 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-71. - Title. 
This article will be known as Peach County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § I; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § I) 
Sec. 26-72. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 26-74(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 26-73(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § II; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § II) 
Sec. 26-73. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 26-74(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § III; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § III) 
Sec. 26-74. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 26-74(c) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs . 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 26-74(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land- disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in (C)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 26-74(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 26-74(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § IV; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § IV) 
Sec. 26-75. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements . 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Peach County without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 26-75(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 26-74(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 26-74(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 26-75(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements . 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 26-74(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 26-74(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 26-75(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § V; Amd. of 3-14-06; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § V) 
Sec. 26-76. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The zoning enforcement officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § VI; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VI) 
Sec. 26-77. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders . 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 26-75(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § VII; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VII) 
Sec. 26-78. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § VIII; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-79. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Peach County Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Peach County. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § IX; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § IX) 
Sec. 26-80. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity . This article shall become effective on the day of ___________, 20________. 
(b)  Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability . 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2010, § X; Ord. of 12-12-2017, § X) 
Secs. 26-81—26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions adopted by an ordinance adopted Sept. 8, 1987, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. IV, §§ 26-101—26-110. 

Sec. 26-101. - Policy. 
It is the public policy of Peach County to prevent excessive sound and vibration which may jeopardize the health, welfare and safety of its citizens or degrade the quality of human life. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § I) 
Sec. 26-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Motor vehicles means any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the Georgia Motor Vehicle Code, specifically including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, minibikes, recreational vehicles, trail bikes and go carts. 
Noise means any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or endangers or injures real or personal property. 
Person means any human being, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as an individual. 
Real property boundary shall mean an imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person but not including the intra-building real property divisions. 
Sound shall mean an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. 
Vibration shall mean an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with respect to a given reference point. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § II) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-103. - Loud, unnecessary or excessive noise prohibited. 
No person may continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort and repose of others within Peach County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § III) 
Sec. 26-104. - Violations of article. 
It shall be unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § IV) 
Sec. 26-105. - General noise restrictions. 
It shall be a violation of this article if between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday night and Saturday night and 9:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday if any noise regulated or prohibited under the provisions of this section is readily audible in another home, residence, apartment or building in which the usual openings, such as windows and doors are closed. The person or persons causing the noise or the owner, lessee, or other person in control of the property from which the noise is emanating shall be deemed to be violating this section. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § V) 
Sec. 26-106. - Specific acts declared violations. 
In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this article: 
(a)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle on any street or public place in the county, continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of 60 seconds, except as a danger warning. 
(b)  Radios, televisions, loudspeakers, musical instruments and similar amplified devices. The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public rights-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device or occupants of the operator's motor vehicle. Also, the playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument or similar device in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or any persons in the vicinity except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type residence or any persons in the vicinity. In the case of noise emanating from a residence or apartment, the owner, lessee, rentor or other person deemed to be in any control of the home, apartment or building shall be deemed to be responsible. 
(d)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other sounds which create excessive or unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial boundary line. For the purposes of this article, barking dog shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously, and/or incessantly for a period of ten minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time, day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a barking dog if at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
(e)  Adequate mufflers or sound-dissipative devices. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped by a muffler in proper working order and in constant operation. No person shall remove or render inoperable or cause to be removed or rendered inoperable any muffler or sound-dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle other than for purposes of maintenance, repair and replacement. 
(f)  Construction work. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays except in the cases of urgent necessity and then only when a permit has been obtained from the office of the county commissioners. If the county zoning officer determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation thereof and if he shall further deem that loss or inconvenience would result to any party at interest, then the office of the county commissioners may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § VI) 
Sec. 26-107. - Exemptions. 
There are exempted from the provisions of this article the following: 
(a)  Domestic power tools, lawnmowers and agricultural equipment when operated with a muffler between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(b)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
(c)  Noises made by persons having obtained a parade, concert, or construction permit from the county. 
(d)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this article and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
(e)  Aircraft related noises associated with aircraft while in flight and while under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense. 
(f)  Any vehicle of the state or county while engaged upon necessary public business. 
(g)  Excavation or repair of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the county or state nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies. 
(h)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of public address which are non-commercial in character. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § VII) 
Sec. 26-108. - Special permits. 
Any person desiring release from any provision of this article may apply for a special permit to cause or create a noise which would otherwise be in violation of this article. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the office of the county commissioners. The permit may be granted to the applicant upon a showing of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the sound producing activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which said permit has been granted including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location, or equipment limitation; provided, however, that no special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 15 consecutive days. Any special permit granted hereunder may be renewed upon application to the office of the county commissioners upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exists. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § VIII) 
Sec. 26-109. - Enforcement. 
The zoning enforcement officer and all law enforcement personnel shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § IX) 
Sec. 26-110. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no less than $25.00 and no more than $500.00; provided, however, that in the case of a violation involving noise caused by a motor vehicle, the person charged with a violation may be granted a period of ten days in which to correct the source of the sound. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § X) 
Secs. 26-111—26-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted January 8, 2000, §§ 1—6, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Art. V, §§ 26-127—26-132 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Floods, Ch. 27. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Div. 1 was created, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of a Div. 2 to incorporate sections set out by Ord. of 11-9-2010. 

Sec. 26-127. - Purpose. 
The intent of this article is to establish minimum development standards and criteria which will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the unincorporated area of the county. It has been determined the wise management of these resources as defined in this article is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare, and economic well being of the public. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 26-128. - Establishment of water resource districts. 
The county's water resource districts shall include the following: 
Groundwater recharge area protection district; 
Wetlands protection district; 
River corridor protection district. 
The boundaries of these water resource districts are shown on a set of maps designated as "Water Resource Districts" and are included as part of the county's official zoning map, which is on file with the county zoning administrator's office located in the county courthouse. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 26-129. - Definitions. 
In addition to the general definitions provided in this article, the following definitions shall apply to this section: 
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Document EPA-600-87-035 (Note: The Drastic methodology is most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Generalized wetlands map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Peach County, Georgia. 
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261.3. (Note: This is same definition as used in the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.) 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination. A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33.USC § 1344, as amended. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding, or alteration of a structure. Land-disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area. A river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "the Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
Perennial river. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Pollution susceptibility. The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility map. The relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the state department of natural resources using the drastic methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia.) 
Protected river. Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U. S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440—12-5-457) or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280—12-5-293.) are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. 
Public utility or utilities. Near a service or services provided by a public utility company or private entity which provides such service or services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
Recharge area. Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Regulated activity. Any activity which will or which may reasonably be expected to result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into the waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
River bank. The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor. All the land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. 
Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the River Corridor Protection District. 
For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the county comprehensive plan. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next comprehensive plan review by the department of community affairs. 
Sensitive natural area. Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the department of natural resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
Significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources and which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Significant recharge areas. Those areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
Single-family dwelling. A dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
Water resource district. A water resource district is a map overlay which imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
Wetlands. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions involving a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 26-130. - Groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides, herbicides, sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
(c)  District delineation. The groundwater recharge area protection district is delineated according to the state department of natural resources' "Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)." Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the "Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map Atlas 20, 1992 Edition." Said maps are hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(d)  Permitted uses. All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the groundwater recharge area protection district. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in size; and 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in size. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the national resource and conservation service. 
(3)  New homes served by septic tank/drain field systems shall be on lots having the following minimum size limitations as identified on Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimum set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in subsections (d)(1)-(6) of this section) of the DHR Manual. The minimum lot size specified by this section shall not be less than the minimum lot size specified in the Peach County Land Development Resolution, section 81.1. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(4)  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' (DHR) Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in subsections (d)(1)-(6) of this sections) of the DHR Manual. The minimum lot size specified by this section shall not be less than the minimum lot size specified in the Peach County Land Development Resolution, section 81.1. 
a.  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
c.  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(5)  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual) and subsections (d)(3) and (4) above. 
(6)  New facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types (listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements. 
(7)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
TABLE MT-1  NEW HOMES MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 
The minimum lot size specified by this section shall not be less than the minimum lot size specified in the Peach County Land Development Resolution, Section 81.1. 

 
* In this context, the term "nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** Gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
TABLE MT-2  MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS MINIMUM LOT SIZES, MINIMUM LOT WIDTHS AND MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SEWAGE FLOW FOR THE TYPE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 
The minimum lot size specified by this section shall not be less than the minimum lot size specified in the Peach County Land Development Resolution, section 81.1. 

 
* In this context, the term "nonpublic" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** Gpad gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
Notes to tables 
Section A.  The above minimum lot sizes are for the typical size home (3 or 4-bedroom) with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees and water supply line. If larger homes, swimming pools, tennis courts or outbuildings, etc. are proposed for construction or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the county board of health will require larger lots to assure usable soil area. 
Section B.  The county board of health may also require larger lot sizes when physical factors indicate the need to do so. These factors include, but are not limited to, the availability of sufficient unobstructed land areas for an approved on-site sewage management system and approved replacement system, slope greater than five percent, percolation rates higher than 45 minutes per inch, need for subsurface drainage or adverse topographic features. 
Section C.  Lots shall be a minimum width of 100 feet or 150 feet measured within the area where an approved on-site sewage management system and replacement system are to be located when served by a public water supply system or nonpublic water supply system, respectively. 
Section D.  The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way of roads, easements (such as power line or pipe line) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
Section E.  There must be an unobstructed area on each lot for installation of an approved on-site sewage management system and an area equal in size for a conventional system or larger area, as appropriate, for an approved replacement system; this will include sufficient area for necessary site modifications for installation of both the initial system and a replacement system. All pertinent County zoning setbacks and other space requirements must also be met. 
Section F.  The maximum daily sewage flow for each lot or parcel of land shall not exceed 600 gpad when served by nonpublic or individual water supply system or 1,200 gpad when served by public water supply system. When sewage flows exceed these quantities (600 or 1,200 gpad as indicated) for a given dwelling structure, the minimum lot size or parcel of land shall be increased proportionally. Example: 
Assume a public water supply exists (so 1,200 gpad maximum sewage flow allowed per minimum required land area of 21,780 square feet), and there is a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd. To determine the square footage of the lot needed, X, use the following formula: 
X = 5,000 gal/day / 1,200 gal/acre/day 
= 4.17 acres 
= 4.17 acres × 43,560 ft 2 /acre 
= 181,500 ft 2 area of land needed. 
Likewise, for a nonpublic (individual) water supply, to determine the square footage of the lot needed, Y, for a proposed sewage flow of 5,000 gpd, use the following formula: 
Y = 5.000 gal/day / 600 gal/acre/day 
= 8.33 acres 
= 8.33 acres × 43,560 ft 2 /acre 
= 363,000 ft 2 area of land needed. 
(e)  Exemptions. Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsection (d)(3), (4) of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 26-131. - Wetlands protection district. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the county are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; natural resource education; scientific study, and recreational opportunities. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
(c)  District delineation. The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the Generalized Wetlands Map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon as attached thereto. 
The generalized wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(d)  Wetland development permit requirements. No regulated activity or use except those identified in 26-131(e) shall be allowed within the wetlands protection district without a development permit from the county. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary as determined by the zoning enforcement officer using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the development permit will not be granted until section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right within the wetlands protection district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging as provided herein. (These activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 Permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed, and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(f)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary landfills. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 5) 
Sec. 26-132. - River corridor protection district. 
(a)  Purpose. River corridors are the strips of land that flank major rivers in Georgia. These corridors are of vital importance to the state in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. River corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
The Flint River has been designated as a protected river by the State of Georgia. The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Flint River as defined herein. 
(b)  Establishment of Flint River Corridor Protection District. The Flint River Corridor Protection District is hereby designated and shall comprise all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of the Flint River within Peach County and being within 100 feet horizontally on the eastern side of the river as measured from the riverbanks. Also included is the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river although this strip of land is not included as part of the 100-foot buffer requirement contained in the minimum standards. This district shall be further defined and delineated on the Flint River Corridor Protection District Map. The Map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(c)  Protection criteria. 
(1)  Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
(2)  A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity. 
(4)  Septic tank and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the river corridor, except as expressly provided in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(5)  Single-family dwellings including the usual appurtenances are permitted in the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
b.  The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. For the purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of the land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (that is, for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks cannot be counted towards the two-acre minimum size). 
c.  There shall be only one such dwelling on each two-acre or larger tract of land. 
d.  A septic tank or tanks serving such a dwelling may be located within the buffer area. 
e.  Septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer area. 
(6)  Industrial and commercial land uses existing in the river corridor prior to the promulgation of this article are exempt from the criteria contained herein, provided that: 
a.  These uses do not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
b.  These uses meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(7)  The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted in the river corridor, provided such construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(8)  The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair the longterm functions of the protected river or the river corridor. 
a.  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Forestry activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission; and 
2.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
b.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. 12-2-8. 
c.  Wastewater treatment. 
d.  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would be consistent with this criterion but a hard-surface tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. Paths and walkways within the river corridor are consistent with this criterion. 
e.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
f.  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; 
2.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
3.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
g.  Other uses permitted by the department of natural resources or under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(9)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(10)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the river corridor. 
(11)  The standards and requirements in this article do not supercede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, and the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following uses are exempted from the river corridor protection plan. 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the Flint River Corridor District. For the purposes of this article, a preexisting use is defined as any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the promulgation of this article falls within one of the following categories. (See subsection (c)(6) of this section for additional regulations governing preexisting industrial and commercial uses.) 
a.  Is completed; 
b.  Is under construction; 
c.  Is fully approved by the governing authority; 
d.  All materials have been submitted for approval by the governing authority; or 
e.  Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
(2)  Mining activities, if permitted by the department of natural resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq., as amended. 
(3)  Utilities (except as discussed above in subsection (c)(7)), if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the local government), provided that: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank as reasonably possible; 
b.  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
c.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed in subsections (c)(8)a. and (c)(8)f. above. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2002, § 6) 
Secs. 26-133—26-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-9-2010 set out provisions intended for use as §§ 26-501—26-505. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 26-141—26-145. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 26-141. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable Peach County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-142. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in division. 
(b)  The Peach County Marshal shall be the enforcement authority for this division. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-143. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are repealed. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-144. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this division are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this division be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of Peach County. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 26-145. - Effective date. 
This division shall go into effect on January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. of 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 26-146—26-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITION ON GROUNDWATER WITHDRAWALS IN CERTAIN DEFINED AREAS OF PEACH COUNTY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 11, 2004, provided for the inclusion of a new article V. Inasmuch as art. V was previously enacted by an ordinance of Jan. 8, 2000, the provisions of the May 11, 2004 ordinance have been included as art. VI to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 26-200. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Peach County Groundwater Withdrawal ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-201. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Peach County through the regulation of groundwater withdrawals and groundwater use in certain areas of the county. This article identifies the areas in the county where groundwater withdrawal and use will be prohibited; prohibits the installation of any new groundwater withdrawal wells and the use of groundwater in those areas; requires the decommissioning of all existing groundwater withdrawal wells in those areas, prohibits the cross-connection of certain groundwater withdrawal wells in those areas; sets forth the methods and the timeframe within which the decommissioning of existing groundwater water withdrawal wells must occur, and establishes the legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(c)  The county administrator or designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-202. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means Peach County, Georgia. 
Decommissioning means the conversion of a nonpublic water well to a monitor well or filling, sealing, and plugging the well in accordance with the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120(16). 
Filled, sealed and plugged means "filled, sealed, and plugged" as defined in the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120(16). 
Groundwater means "ground water" as defined in the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120(18). 
Identified area means the area identified in Appendix A*, and any additional area as identified by future resolution of the Commission. 
Nonpotable water means groundwater that is unsuitable for direct human contact but is appropriate for other uses such as irrigation, landscaping, laundering, heating and cooling systems, fire control, street cleaning and controlling dust at construction sites. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record of real property in the identified area. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Potable water means groundwater that is suitable for direct human contact and uses such as drinking, cooking, bathing, and some construction activities such as making concrete. 
Public officer means the building inspector of the county or any other officer who is authorized by the county to exercise the powers of the county provided in this article, or any agent of such officer. 
Well means a "well" as defined in the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985(33); in addition, the term "well" means "dewatering well," "drilling" or "drilling operation," "engineering borehole," "individual water well," "industrial well," "irrigation well," "monitor well," "nonpublic water well," and a "water well" as defined in the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985, but shall not include any monitor well, geoprobe, or other similar device or measuring instrument necessary to be installed or undertaken to comply with applicable environmental laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Editor's note— Appendix A referred to in this section is set out herein and codified as article V of this chapter, and adopted to the Ord. of May 11, 2004. 
Sec. 26-203. - Connection of real properties in identified area to public drinking system. 
All portions of real property located within the identified area shall be served by and connected to the county's water supply system. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-204. - Prohibitions on installation of new wells and use of groundwater for potable water purposes in identified area. 
No new wells shall be installed or constructed on any portion of real property in the identified area. No groundwater beneath any portion of real property located within the identified area may be used for potable water purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-205. - Prohibition on cross connection to publicly provided water supply. 
No connection or cross connection shall be permitted between an existing, abandoned or closed well located on any portion of real property in the identified area and any public water supply system or piping for any potable water purposes. The construction, connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any illicit connection to a well located on any portion of real property in the identified area shall be prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-206. - Permanent closure of existing wells located on any portion of real property in identified area. 
Within 30 calendar days of the effective date of this article, all wells with a screened elevation at or above 250 feet above mean sea level used for potable and non-potable water purposes located on any portion of real property in the identified area shall be permanently decommissioned either by converting to a monitoring well or closed, disconnected and filled, sealed, and plugged in accordance with the Georgia Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq., and all applicable guidance from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division or the Georgia Geological Survey. The county will decommission all applicable wells located on any portion of the identified area at the county's cost and expense, provided the property owner requests that the county decommission the well on any portion of the property in the identified area within 30 days of the effective date of this article. In the event wells on any portion of property located within the identified area are required to be closed and filled, sealed and plugged under this article, the owner of such property shall notify the county within 30 days of the permanent closure of such wells and that the wells have been closed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-207. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Whenever the county administrator or designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the county administrator shall provide written notice of violation to the responsible person. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the real property and, if applicable and if known, the resident or lessee at the property; 
(2)  The street address or, if a street address is not available, a description of the property, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A description of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the measures necessary to bring the property into compliance and a time schedule for the completion of such action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties, if any, that will or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(c)  In lieu of or in addition to the notice of violation, whenever the county administrator or designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the county administrator may issue an order to the responsible person to undertake any or all of the following actions: 
(1)  Close or abandon any and all temporary or permanent wells and related piping or equipment; 
(2)  Eliminate or disconnect any illicit groundwater connections, cross-connections or other uses; 
(3)  Cease and desist any uses of wells; 
(4)  Abate or otherwise correct any hazards to public health and safety created by the activity violating this article; and 
(5)  Pay all expenses and a fine to cover administrative costs. 
(d)  Any person receiving a notice of violation from the county administrator may appeal the determination to the county commission. A written notice of appeal must be received by the chair of the county commission no later than ten days after the date of the notice of violation, and the failure to file a written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of all claims. A hearing on the appeal before the commission shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final and may be appealed in accordance with subsection 26-211(b). If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or if no appeal has been filed in compliance with subsection 26-211(b), the county administrator or designee shall have the authority to enter upon the real property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or close or abandon the well. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Orders issued by the county administrator pursuant to this article shall be served upon each person in possession of the real property or to the record owner the real property. Service of orders shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of section 26-46 of the Peach County Code. For the purposes of this article, where section 26-46 refers to "persons in interest," such reference shall be construed to mean all owners and persons in possession of real property subject to this article. Any person who is affected by an order issued pursuant to this article may petition to the Superior Court of Peach County for an injunction restraining the county from carrying out the provisions of the order; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 calendar days of the posting and service of the order of the county. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(f)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(g)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed six months per violation. Each day a violation continues, after notification thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense under this article. The county may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(h)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the county administrator or designee to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-208. - Costs incurred by county shall be lien on property. 
(a)  Within 30 days after abatement of a violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The notification will include a description of the costs and expense incurred by county, its employees or contractors. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days of receipt of the notification, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to Peach County by reason of such violation. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon payment of all costs by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk of the governing body of the county on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. 
(b)  The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such a lien by paying to the county within 30 calendar days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per year, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection; 
(2)  If the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county; and 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-209. - Powers of public officers. 
The county administrator shall have and exercise such powers as may be necessary and convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this division: to investigate real property located within the identified area and the county to determine compliance with this article; to enter upon real property for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; to appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, contractors, and employees as he deems necessary and convenient to carry out the purpose of this article; and to delegate any of his functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as the county administrator may designate. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-211. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Any person owning property or holding a property interest in any property located within the identified area, or any county resident who asserts the requirements of this article are unconstitutional as applied to him or her, as of the effective date of this article, shall have the right to file a written appeal of the requirements of this article to the county administrator. The county administrator shall, within 30 days of receiving written notice from the property owner or county resident, hold a hearing to consider any and all facts, evidence, and arguments concerning the requirements of this article, including, without limitation, the location or condition or any well within the identified area and the boundaries of the identified area. Within 15 days thereafter, the county administrator shall issue a written determination on the request. Any person aggrieved or significantly affected by the decision of the county administrator shall present its grievance to the county commission for a hearing within 30 days of the decision or order of the county administrator and the county commission shall issue a written finding on the facts, evidence and arguments put forth at the hearing. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved or affected by the decision of the county commission shall have the right to appeal the decision of the county commission to the Superior Court of Peach County, Georgia. Appeals to the superior court shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the decision of the county commission, and upon failure to file said appeal within 30 days, the decision of the county commission shall be final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-212. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held to be invalid and/or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(c)  In the computation of time for actions or events under this order, if a time period ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or national holiday, the time period shall extend to the next business day. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Sec. 26-215. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on the 30th day following its adoption. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2004) 
Secs. 26-216—26-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 26-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
"Peach County Separate Storm Sewer System" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are: 
• Owned or maintained by Peach County; 
• Not a combined sewer; and 
• Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Construction activity" means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
"Hazardous materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
"Illicit discharge" means either of the following: 
Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
"Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means the contamination or other alternation of any water's physical, chemical, or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
"Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from precipitation. 
"Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 1) 
Sec. 26-262. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Peach County through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Peach County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Peach County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Peach County separate storm sewer system by any user; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the Peach County separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Control discharge to the Peach County separate storm sewer system of spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater; 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all water entering the Peach County separate storm sewer system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the county administrator or his/her designee. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The county administrator or his/her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 2) 
Sec. 26-263. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the county administrator or his/her designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the county administrator or his/her designee shall order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the county administrator or his/her designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the county administrator or his/her designee within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Peach County Board of Commissioners shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Peach County Board of Commissioners shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the Peach County Board of Commissioners' ruling upholding the decision of the county administrator, then the county administrator or his/her designee shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Cost of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The notification will include copies of all invoices paid by the county, and a log of all hours spent by county personnel. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days of receipt of the notification, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to Peach County by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided in article II of this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(g)  Prosecution in magistrate court. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,000.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed six months per violation. Each day a violation continues, after notification thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense under this article. 
The county may recover all attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law, and it is within the discretion of the county administrator or his/her designee to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 3) 
Sec. 26-264. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge or cause to throw, drain, run, or allow to seep or otherwise be discharged into the Peach County separate storm sewer system any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illicit discharge to the Peach County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
The following are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the county administrator or his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety; provided, however, if the county administrator or his/her designee finds that any exemptions previously granted are causing adverse impacts to water quality, then the county administrator or his/her designee shall have the authority to rescind such exemption and regulate the discharge under the provisions of this article. 
The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the county for any discharge to the Peach County separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any illicit connection to the Peach County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the Peach County separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the sanitary sewer system upon directive of the county administrator or his/her designee and the Peach County Stormwater Department. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 4) 
Sec. 26-265. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the county administrator or his/her designee prior to the allowing of discharges to the Peach County separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 5) 
Sec. 26-266. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. The county administrator or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the county administrator or his/her designee. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the county administrator or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The county administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the county administrator or his/her designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The county administrator or his/her designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner at the written or oral request of the county administrator or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the owner. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the county administrator or his/her designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the county administrator or his/her designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the county administrator or his/her designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 6) 
Sec. 26-267. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Peach County separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile, or in person no later than the next business day of the nature, quantity, and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the county administrator or his/her designee within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
In either case, such person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(Ord. of 1-10-06, § 7) 
Secs. 26-268—26-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LIMITATION ON ENGINE IDLING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 46. 

Sec. 26-326. - Findings and purpose. 
The Peach County Board of Commissioners finds that: 
(1)  Air pollution is a major public health concern in Middle Georgia. Currently, Bibb County and part of Monroe County are designated as non-attainment for the one-hour federal ozone standard, as well as the more stringent state ozone standard. Air pollution can cause or aggravate lung illnesses such as acute respiratory infections, asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and lung cancer. In addition to health impacts, air pollution imposes significant economic costs and negative impacts on our quality of life. 
(2)  Exhaust from vehicles (both on- and off-road) is a substantial source of ozone precursors in the Middle Georgia region. Vehicle exhaust is also a source of carbon monoxide, particulate matter, toxic air contaminants, and greenhouse gases. Although new engines have become cleaner due to improved emission control technologies, the slow turnover in their inventory and the number of miles/hours these vehicles idle each year is hindering progress in improving regional air quality. 
(3)  Public agencies can play an important role in improving air quality by limiting the amount of time engines are allowed to idle within their jurisdiction. Public agencies have the responsibility to lead the effort to improve air quality by adopting ordinances that are cost effective in reducing ozone precursor emissions and toxic air contaminants. 
(4)  Under this article, a limitation on diesel engine idling is established by the Peach County Board of Commissioners to discourage the idling of engines in unincorporated Peach County. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-327. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, urgent, usually unforeseen, occurrence. 
"Equipment operator" means any person who is in actual physical control of a piece of off-road equipment. 
"Gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
"Heavy-duty vehicle" means any on-road motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating greater than 14,000 pounds. 
"Idling" means the engine is running while the vehicle is stationary or the piece of off-road equipment is not performing work. 
"Medium-duty vehicle" means any on-road motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 6,001—14,000 pounds. 
"Official traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking, or device, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic, but does not include islands, curbs, traffic barriers, speed humps, speed bumps, or other roadway design features. 
"Official traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
"Off-road equipment" means all non-road equipment with a horsepower rating of 50 or greater. 
"Transport refrigeration unit" or "TRU" means a refrigeration system powered by an engine designed to control the environment of temperature sensitive cargo. A TRU is a piece of off-road equipment regardless of its horsepower rating. 
"Vehicle" means any on-road, self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and have a license plate by the department of motor vehicles. 
"Vehicle/equipment owner" means the registered owner, lessee, licensee, or bailee of any heavy- or medium-duty vehicle or piece of off-road equipment who operates or directs the operation of any such vehicle or equipment on either a for-hire or not-for-hire basis. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-328. - Applicability. 
There is hereby established an ordinance to be known as the "Limitation on engine idling" that applies to the operation of all diesel fueled vehicles regardless of gross vehicle weight rating, all heavy-duty diesel operated vehicles, all off-road diesel-powered equipment regardless of horsepower rating, and all off-road diesel powered equipment. Additionally, this ordinance applies to TRU engines as specified in section 26-327. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-329. - Idling limitation. 
(a)  A driver of a vehicle: 
(1)  Must turn off the engine upon stopping at a destination; and 
(2)  Must not cause or allow an engine to idle at any location for more than five consecutive minutes. 
(b)  An equipment operator of an off-road piece of equipment must not cause or allow an off-road piece of equipment to idle at any location for more than five consecutive minutes. 
(c)  An equipment operator of a TRU must not cause or allow a TRU to operate within 1,000 feet of a residential area or school, unless the cargo will be loaded or has been unloaded within 45 minutes. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-330. - Exemptions. 
This chapter does not apply to a vehicle or piece of equipment for the period or periods during which: 
(1)  Idling is necessary while stopped: 
a.  For an official traffic control device; 
b.  For an official traffic control signal; 
c.  For traffic conditions over which the driver has no control, including, but not limited to: Stopped in a line of traffic, stopped at a railroad crossing, or stopped at a construction zone; or 
d.  At the direction of a peace officer; 
(2)  Idling is necessary to ascertain that the vehicle and/or the off-road equipment is in safe operating condition and equipped as required by all provisions of law, and all equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle inspection, or as otherwise needed; 
(3)  Idling is necessary for testing, servicing, repairing, or diagnostic purposes; 
(4)  Idling is necessary, for a period not to exceed five minutes or as recommended by the manufacturer to cool down a turbo-charged heavy-duty vehicle before turning the engine off; 
(5)  Idling is necessary to accomplish work for which the vehicle/equipment was designed, other than transporting goods, for example: Operating a lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, ready mixed concrete mixer vehicle, or other auxiliary equipment other than a heater or air conditioner; 
(6)  Idling is necessary to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed to ensure safe loading and unloading of goods and people; 
(7)  Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency. 
(8)  Idling is necessary solely to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid electric vehicle/equipment; or 
(9)  Idling is necessary to operate equipment that runs intermittently. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-331. - Relationship to other laws. 
Nothing in this article allows idling in excess of other applicable laws, including, but not limited to any local ordinance or requirement as stringent as, or more stringent than this article. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-332. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-333. - Enforcement. 
This article may be enforced by the Peach County Sheriffs Office and the Peach County Marshal. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Sec. 26-334. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this article shall be effective upon adoption by the Peach County Board of Commissioners [July 11, 2006]. 
(Ord. of 7-11-06(5)) 
Secs. 26-335—26-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII.5. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-351. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Intent. Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased non-point source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and quantity can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. Peach County, Georgia (the "county") is required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations, and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and non-point source pollution. The intent of this article is to ensure impacts of new development and re-development can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quality and quantity from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas, and meet state and federal laws, regulations, and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and non-point source pollution. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this post development stormwater management ordinance ("ordinance") is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet the purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are properly maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, disapproval and permitting of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(c)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  The county administrator or designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-352. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicant. A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Agricultural operations. Defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement. An agreement between a land owner and the county that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place. 
County. Peach County, Georgia. 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, or land surveying. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Detention. The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility. A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer. A person that undertakes land development activities. 
Development. A development project or land development project. 
Drainage easement. An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other personas to discharge stormwater runoff and/or maintain stormwater drainage infrastructure on the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities, and control the release of pollutants from the site. 
Extended detention. The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection. Measures taken to prevent adverse impact from large storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding. A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a pond, conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Forestry land management practices. Harvesting, planting, or other forest management practices. 
Greenspace or open space. Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in urban stormwater runoff. Examples include, but are not limited to gas stations, vehicle service and maintenance areas, industrial facilities such as salvage areas (both permitted and unpermitted under the industrial general permit and others), material storage sites, solid waste transfer facilities, and commercial parking lots with high-intensity use. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG). A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with highly permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration. The process of stormwater runoff percolating into the subsoil or bedrock. 
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation and under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Land development. Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities. Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project. A discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development. Land development activity, structural development, (construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other structure), and/or creation of impervious surfaces on a previously undeveloped site. 
Non-point source pollution. A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Non-point source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, development, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice of nonstructural practice. Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to , riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Over bank flood protection. Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner. The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Stormwater permit. The permit issued by the county to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity that disturbs one acre or more of land or adds 5,000 square feet or more of impervious area. 
Person. Except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, town, county or other political subdivision of the state, and interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development. The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development. The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, road and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project. A land development project. 
Previously developed site. A site that has been altered by paving, construction and/or land use that would typically have required regulatory permitting to have been initiated (alterations may exist now or in the past). 
Redevelopment. Structural development (construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other structure), creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or greater impervious surfaces or the disturbance of one acre or more of land. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional non-point source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site control is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff. Stormwater runoff. 
Site. The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located 
Stormwater better site design practices. Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on watersheds and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management to reduce the amount of runoff and pollutants that are generated from a site. 
Stormwater management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility. Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure. Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan. A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system. The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the peak flow, quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff. The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, at the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, or other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-353. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability . 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, land disturbance applications and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities or land disturbing activities of one (1.0) acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, or addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1.0) acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the county administrator (or designee) to be a hotspot land use; or land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a and b above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development (i.e. Subdivisions), even though multiple, that is a part of separate and distinct land development activities that may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  In order to avoid excessive regulation on individual residential lots, maintenance and repair efforts, and environmental projects, the following development activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots disturbing less than one (1.0) acre that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Minor land disturbing activities (such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion) conducted outside of the 25-foot undisturbed buffer along the banks of all state waters requiring a buffer on individual residential lots sold to homeowners where all planned construction activities on that lot have been completed and have undergone final stabilization; 
d.  Infrastructure construction projects that consist solely of routine maintenance for the original purpose of the facility that is performed to maintain the original line and grade and the hydraulic capacity, as applicable. The construction activity shall, as a minimum, implement and maintain best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is being conducted. In order to be eligible for this exemption the project must comply with the following conditions: (i) no mass grading shall occur on the project, (ii) the project shall be stabilized by the end of each day with temporary or permanent stabilization measures, (iii) the project shall have a duration of less than 120 calendar days, and (iv) final stabilization must be implemented at the end of the maintenance project; 
e.  Infrastructure road construction projects that consist solely of routine maintenance for the original purpose of the facility that is performed to maintain the original line and grade and vehicular capacity, as applicable. The construction activity shall, as a minimum, implement and maintain best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is being conducted. In order to be eligible for this exemption the project must comply with the following conditions: (1) no mass grading shall occur on the project, (2) the project shall be stabilized by the end of each day with temporary or permanent stabilization measures, (3) the project shall have a duration of less than 120 calendar days, and (4) final stabilization must be implemented at the end of the maintenance project; 
f.  Railroad construction projects and emergency re-construction conducted pursuant to the Federal Railway Safety Act, the Interstate Commerce Commission Termination Act and which consist solely of routine maintenance for the original purpose of the facility that is performed to maintain the original line and grade and the hydraulic capacity, as applicable. The construction activity should, at a minimum, implement and maintain best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation consistent with the requirements of the Federal Railway Safety Act and applicable requirements of the Clean Water Act; 
g.  Agricultural operations as or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
h.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the county administrator (or designee). 
(b)  Stormwater management criteria . All stormwater management plans shall meet all policy, criteria, and requirements, including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the Latest edition of the County's Local Stormwater Management Manual. For the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The word "should" as printed in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is changed to "shall" in all references. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-354. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is required that the land owner, developer, and/or design professional meet with the county stormwater manager (or designee) for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans . Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; potential impacts on perennial, intermittent and ephemeral streams (note: final stream classification determination will be determined by the county); mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation, proposed limits of clearing and grading, and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces and existing improvements. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory . A short written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, downstream receiving waters (name and classification(s)), stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan . A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(4)  Local watershed plans . The county watershed projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-355. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in this article. 
This plan shall be prepared in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted and sealed by a design professional, who must certify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the requirements outlined in the current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and the latest edition of the County's Local Stormwater Management Manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and the latest edition of the County's Local Stormwater Management Manual. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project and each contributing basin; all perennial, intermittent and ephemeral streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; flow paths used to calculate flow times or times of concentration, direction of flow and stormwater exists from the site; contributing off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post development stormwater management performance criteria in the ordinance; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in the article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and 25-year and 100-year hydraulic grade lines and 25-year and 100-year velocities for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales, and areas of overland flow and all 100-year surface water elevations; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream form the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the county erosion and sediment troll ordinance and NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is provided. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plans shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the county, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the county that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan and issuance of the stormwater permit. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-356. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the county requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the county, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the county prior to plan approval and issuance of the stormwater permit, and recorded in the deed records upon final stormwater management plan approval. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. In additions to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the county may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 26-363 of this article. The county, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of an existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and included adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-357. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the county which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the county that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, damns, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-358. - Post development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality . All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
c.  The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Stormwater Quality Site Development Review Tool shows that 85 percent of the total suspended solids (TSS) have been removed from post-developed stormwater runoff through the use of structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices; and, 
d.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activates identified by the county are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater control, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protections . Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-359. - Over bank flooding protection. 
Downstream over bank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 26-359 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 100-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-360. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(1)  Structural stormwater controls . All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the county before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the county may impose additional requirement(s) deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased non-point source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(2)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures . The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 26-359. The applicant may, if approved by the county, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that quality for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(3)  Drainage system guidelines . Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the County's Local Stormwater Management Manual. 
b.  All culvert, pipe systems and open channel flow systems and facilities shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the county's local stormwater management manual. 
(4)  Dam design guidelines . Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-361. - Construction inspections of post-developed stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction . Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the county or conducted or certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the county. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that constrain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether stormwater management systems and facilities are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved stormwater management plan; and, 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any deficiencies are identified, the owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the deficiencies or violations and the required corrective actions and response time. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-362. - Final inspection and as built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans and calculations for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction are completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices are in compliance with the stormwater management plan and must be certified by a design professional. A final inspection by the county is required before acceptance of any infrastructure by the county or the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-363. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices: Stormwater management facilities and systems include in a stormwater management plan which is subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement requiring ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the approved stormwater management plan and this article. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement and a report of the inspections be sent to the county stormwater manager annually. In the event that the inspection reports are not submitted to the county stormwater manager or the stormwater management system or facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health or deemed a public nuisance, the county shall notify the owner by registered or certified mail. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the approved stormwater management plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the owner fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintained agreement, the county, may correct the violations and hold the owner responsible for the cost of such corrective action. The county may conduct routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-364. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities or be issued a land development permit for development or redevelopment requiring a stormwater permit in accordance with section 26-353 without first meeting the requirements of this article. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the county a "stormwater permit" application on a form provided by the county for that purpose. A permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 26-355; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 26-355; 
(3)  Stormwater permit application on a form provided by the county; and, 
(4)  Plan review fees in accordance with section 26-366. 
An approved stormwater permit must be obtained and submitted to the planning and zoning office prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(b)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for stormwater permits shall be filed with the county stormwater division. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 26-364(a) above 
(3)  The county shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved within 30 calendar days of submittal. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the county shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same with the plan review fees, in which event, subparagraph (3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the county that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, meet the requirements of this article, the county may issue a stormwater permit for the project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the stormwater permit in conducting the development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The county shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the county; and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's as-built report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 26-362. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 26-365. - Application review fees and permit fees. 
(a)  The fee for the first review, or each subsequent resubmittal review, of any stormwater management plan submitted as part of a stormwater permit application shall be $100.00 or $10.00 per acre whichever is greater. 
(b)  Upon approval of the stormwater management plan, the stormwater permit will be issued at no cost. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2018) 
Secs. 26-366—26-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEACH COUNTY TIMBER OPERATIONS 

Sec. 26-401. - Title 
This article shall be known as the "Peach County Timber Operations Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-402. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term; 
Commissioners . Means Board of Commissioners of Peach County or their successors in office being the governing authority of Peach County. 
County . Means Peach County, Georgia. 
Timber . Means pine, cypress, and hardwood trees and trees of every size, species and description. Also, for purposes of this article, "timber" includes such trees after harvesting and while being transported as logs or shorter lengths. 
Timber operations . Means purchasing and/or cutting and harvesting timber in Peach County, or transporting such timber from the site at which it was cut; or the moving of equipment to and from the site of such cutting. 
Timber operator . Means any persons, firm, or corporation engaged in commercial timber operations, whether engaged in one or all of said activities described in "timber operations" above. It shall not include persons cutting or transporting timber solely for non-commercial personal use or firewood. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-403. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required . No timber operator shall engage in timber operations in the county without first obtaining a permit to conduct such operations as provided herein; provided, however, employees of a timber operator shall not be required to obtain a separate permit for activities within the scope of such employment if their employer has obtained a valid permit for such activities; and provided further that an independent contractor transporting timber for another timber operator shall not be required to obtain a separate permit if the timber operator for whom he is transporting timber has obtained a valid permit for such timber operations at the same location. 
(b)  Place of filing . The application for permit shall be signed by the applicant and filed with the office of Peach County Planning and Zoning, and forms shall be available at such office. The zoning administrator or his designee at said office of the Peach County Planning and Zoning shall review the application and issue the permit if all required information is provided. Completed application forms may be emailed to said office, and if the applicant provides email address, the permit may be emailed back to the applicant. 
(c)  Application for permit . The application for permit shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioners and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, timber operator, or timber purchaser. 
(2)  If the applicant or timber operator intends to engage another or other contractor(s) to harvest or transport the timber, the applicant shall also include name, address, and telephone number of each such contractor or harvester. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will engage in timber operations. 
(4)  The location of the property on which the applicant/purchaser/timber operator will engage in timber operations (including tax map and parcel number). 
(5)  The roads in Peach County upon which motor vehicles will travel in transporting such timber and in transporting the equipment to be used in the timber operations and showing all locations of ingress and egress from the timber tract to the public roads(s). 
(6)  The applicant shall be responsible for ALL damages and shall present a letter of credit or cashier's check for $5,000.00 to protect the county against damages caused by the applicant. The applicant shall also be liable and responsible for all additional damage exceeding the $5,000.00. 
(7)  The dates cutting operations are expected to commence and end. 
(8)  The applicant shall present a copy of his/her/its current business license. 
(d)  Posted notice . Once application requirements have been met, the planning and zoning office will provide a permit at no cost. Said permit must be displayed and available for review at the main point of ingress and egress to a public road and in such a location as to be seen by the traveling public. 
(e)  Incomplete applications . Incomplete applications will not be accepted and will be returned to applicant. 
(f)  Other laws . In addition to provisions of this article, the applicant for a permit shall comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to its timber operations, including payment of all applicable ad valorem tax on the timber. 
(g)  Cost . There shall be no cost or fee imposed for filing the application or issuing the permit. 
(h)  Separate applications . Applicants must file a separate application and receive a separate permit for each separate timber cutting operation and each separate land owner. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-404. - Violations; penalties. 
Any timber operator who shall willfully fail to comply with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; amenable to the process of the Magistrate Court of Peach County, Georgia, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-405. - Repealed. 
All ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-406. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective May 1, 2017. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-407. - Notice of timber operators. 
The Peach County Board of Planning and Zoning shall mail or deliver a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives to all timber operators and other persons whom the board has knowledge of or can identify as persons or businesses which cut, harvest, or transport trees or timber on or from lands in Peach County, and publicize or make known by any reasonable means the general contents of this article to as many persons as possible dealing with timber in this county. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 26-408. - Application/permit numbers. 
Each application filed shall be assigned a number consisting of the year and quarter of the year of filing, followed by a number representing the order in which that application was filed in that year. (For example the first application filed in the first quarter 2017 would have a number of "2017-1-1"). The permit number will be the same number as the application number. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 27 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance adopted September 9, 2008, amended Ch. 27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 27 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1—27-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-30. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners, of Peach County, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 27-31. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds, and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced section 27-36. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate; including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 3, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed by July 3, 1009. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park and subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land areas susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(2)  Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after July 3, 1990 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 3, 1990. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), as corrected in 1988, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alterations of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. (NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.) This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state and local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstructions or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 2; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 6) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 27-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  The flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 1, § B; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 27-33. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 1, § C; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 27-34. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 1, § D; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 27-35. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § A; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 27-36. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS date September 28, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Peach County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the county zoning office. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § B; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 27-37. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § D; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 27-38. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing article, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § E; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 27-39. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § F) 
Sec. 27-40. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Peach County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § G; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 27-41. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Peach County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § H; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 27-42—27-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2. 

Sec. 27-61. - Local administrator. 
(a)  Designation . The director of engineering services is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the local administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 27-36, then the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 27-62(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 27-62(b)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the local administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 27-62(b)(1)c. and subsections 27-82(2) or 27-85(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any altercation or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the local administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the local administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 4, §§ A, C; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 3, §§ A, C; Ord. of 3-13-2018(2); Ord. of 12-12-2018(1)) 
Sec. 27-62. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Required. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(b)  Application. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 27-82(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 3, § C, art. 4, § B; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 2, § C, art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 27-63. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The county planning and zoning board as established by the board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to reserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of the article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in floods levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the county planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the county planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 4, § D; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 5) 
Secs. 27-64—27-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 27-81. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as to not violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 5; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 27-82. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 27-81(4), "Elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure located in A1, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above in subsection 27-61(b)(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See subsection 27-81(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structured or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 27-82(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 27-36, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 5, § B; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 27-83. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 27-36, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 27-36, then the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions, subsections (2) and (3), shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 27-81(4), "Elevated buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The local administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 5, § C; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 27-84. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots of five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final letter of map revision. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 5, § D; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 27-85. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 27-36, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 27-81(4), "Elevated buildings." 
The local administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with the attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designated to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 27-62(b)(1)c. and (b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 3-27-90, art. 5, § E; Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 27-86. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-08, art. 4, § F) 
Chapter 28 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Article I. - In General 

Secs. 28-1—28-29. - Reserved. 
Article II. - Body Art 

Sec. 28-30. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this Rule is Chapter 31-40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. (O.C.G.A. Chapters 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9, 31-40-10 and 31-5.) 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § I, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. If followed, such standards should ensure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. They also provide for the regular inspection of establishments wherein body art activities are to be performed and contain enforcement provisions including but not limited to revocation of the registration or licensure of any person or establishment deemed in violation of these rules and regulations or any promulgated hereunder. These rules and regulations provide for an annual inspection fee to be paid by persons and by establishments registered under these rules and regulations. This fee is intended to help defray the cost to the Peach County Board of Health of the administration for the requirements of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § II, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-32. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. Exemptions may include cosmetic reconstructive surgery or procedures performed under the direct supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § III, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-33. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Administrative body means the partnership, corporation, association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the body art studio and personnel, and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
Antibacterial ointment means topical antibiotics that destroy or suppress the growth or reproduction of bacteria available in a semisolid preparation (water-in-oil) that are generally occlusive (preventing the escape of moisture) and somewhat difficult to remove from the skin once applied; approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the Food and Drug Administration. 
Antimicrobial solution means any solution capable of killing or used to retard the growth of microorganisms approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA); when referring to antimicrobial mouthwash, only those approved for use will be allowed in the facility such as chlorhexidine, hydrogen peroxide, alcohol and others commonly found in hospital or dental settings. 
Antiseptic means an agent or substance that will destroy or inhibit the growth and development of infectious microorganisms on human skin or mucous membranes. 
Applicant means any person who applies for a body art license, guest body art license, artist apprentice license, body art establishment permit, or temporary body art establishment permit. 
Apprentice means an individual, over the age of 17, undergoing an extended period of piercer or tattooer training under the direction of a qualified, skilled, and experienced mentor (professional) within a studio environment; to serve as an apprentice 
Approval means written approval from the Peach County Health Authority indicating that the body art establishment has been inspected and meets all terms of the applicable rules. 
Approved means being accepted by the Peach County Health Authority as appropriate under applicable laws and regulations. 
Aseptic technique means to render or maintain free from infectious material so as to prevent transfer or transmission of infectious agents. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
ASTM means the American Society for Testing Materials International. 
Autoclave means an apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a specific temperature over a period of time per manufacturer's specifications. For the purpose of this rule, autoclaves will be class B medical grade only. 
Biomedical waste shall mean and include the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues which are removed during procedures; 
(2)  Biological waste which means blood and blood products, exudates secretions, suctioning, and other body fluids which contain free liquids and cannot be or are not directly discarded into a municipal or on-site sewer system; 
(3)  Sharps which mean any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes but is not limited to items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes with needles attached, and scalpel blades; 
(4)  Other miscellaneous medical equipment, including but not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubings, vials, etc.; 
(5)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, excluding expendable supplies and materials included in paragraphs (1)—(4) above. 
Blood means human blood, human blood components, and products made from human blood. 
Blood borne pathogens means pathogenic microorganisms present in human blood that can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include but are not limited to Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), and Human Immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Board of health means the Local Peach County Board of Health. 
Body art means the practice of physical body adornment by means of tattooing or body piercing. This definition does not include practices considered medical procedures by the Georgia Medical Composite Board such as implants under the skin which are prohibited unless such medical procedures are performed by a person licensed by the Georgia Medical Composite Board. 
Body art advisory committee means a group of people that determine the approvals of the body art professionals and apprenticeships and oversee the apprenticeship process. The committee consists of one public health nurse, one environmental health specialist, one professional body piercer, one professional tattoo artist, and the district environmental health director (DEHD). Positions may have one designated alternate and will rotate off after four years of service on the committee with the exception of the DEHD. 
Body art establishment or "body art studio" means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license, if applicable, and permit from the Peach County Board of Health where the practices of body art are performed whether or not for profit. 
Body art establishment permit or permit means the issuance of a written permit by the Peach County Health Department to a body art establishment stating that such establishment, after inspection, was found to be in compliance with these regulations. 
Body artist means a person at least 18 years of age who performs tattooing or body piercing and who is responsible for complying with applicable provisions of these regulations. 
Body art license shall mean a license issued by the Peach County Health Department to a specifically identified person who is qualified to engage in the practice of body art in accordance with these regulations and in conjunction with a permitted establishment. 
Body art regulation shall mean the rules, regulations and guidelines promulgated by the Peach County Board of Health pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-40 as amended from time to time. 
Body piercer means a person at least 18 years of age who engages in the practice of body piercing regardless of the type of body ornament utilized or body area to be pierced and who is responsible for complying with applicable provisions of these regulations. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetrating the skin or mucosa of a client utilizing a single- use, sterile needle or other sterile instrument for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other adornment into the body for non-medical purposes; body piercing includes ear piercing, except when the ear piercing procedure is performed on the ear lobe with an ear piercing gun using sterile materials. 
Body piercing establishment means any permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation holding a valid Peach County business license, if applicable, and permit from the Peach County Health Department where body piercing is performed, including any area under the control of the operator. 
Business means any entity that provides body art services or procedures for compensation. 
Cleaning/clean room shall mean the area in a body art establishment used in the sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment used for the practice of body art and shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of ten feet. 
Client or customer shall mean an individual upon whom one or more body art activities are to be performed. 
Contaminated means the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of blood, other potentially infectious materials, or potentially harmful chemicals on an item or surface. 
Contaminated waste shall mean any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials, as defined in O.C.G.A. 
Convention means a large meeting of people who come to a place for usually several days to talk about their shared work or other interests or to make decisions as a group, i.e. industry trade show 
County means the Peach County Board of Commissioners or its duly authorized representatives. 
Critical violation(s) means those aspects of operation or conditions which, if in violation, constitute the greatest hazards to health and safety, including imminent health hazards. Critical violations shall include the following: 
(1)  Autoclave does not meet minimum time, pressure or temperature requirements or written emergency procedures are not established or approved by the health authority; 
(2)  Lack of a monthly negative spore or microbiological monitoring test for quality control; 
(3)  Non-disposable tubes and needles are not sterilized or were sterilized greater than one (1) year ago; 
(4)  Work area is not equipped as required or is not stocked; 
(5)  Reuse of single-use articles; 
(6)  Sterile instruments are not properly handled; 
(7)  Reusable instruments are not handled properly; 
(8)  Employees with infectious lesions on hands not restricted from body art procedures; 
(9)  Employees not practicing proper cleanliness and good hygienic practices; 
(10)  Water supply not approved or hot and cold running water under pressure not available (or written emergency procedure for water not established/approved); 
(11)  Cross connection allowing back-siphonage present in plumbing system; 
(12)  Toilet and/or hand washing facilities not available for employees; 
(13)  Toxic items not properly stored, labeled, or used. 
Decontamination means the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use, or disposal. 
Department means the Peach County Department of Health or its agents. 
Disinfectant means a solution registered as a disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and intended to destroy or inactivate specific viruses, bacteria, or fungi on clean, inanimate surfaces. Labeling should specifically state that the product is bactericidal, virucidal, fungicidal, and tuberculocidal. 
Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use or handling. 
Ear piercing means the puncturing of the outer ear for non-medical purposes. 
Easily cleanable means that surfaces are readily accessible and made of such materials and finish and so fabricated to be smooth, non-absorbent and so that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment. 
FDA means the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
Germicidal solution means any solution which destroys microorganisms and is so labeled. 
Gloves means medical grade disposable single use gloves labeled for surgical or examination purposes. Vinyl gloves are not allowed in body art facilities. 
Guest body artist shall mean a visiting body artist possessing a guest body art license issued by the health authority to perform body art. 
Guest body art license means the issuance of a seven-day license by the Peach County Health Authority. Such license will allow a person to practice body art in accordance with the body art regulations under the direct supervision of a body artist holding a valid body art license issued by the health authority. 
Hand sanitizer means an alcohol-based hand rub that contains at least 60 percent alcohol used in conjunction with soap and water for the routine decontamination of hands. 
Health authority means the Peach County Health Department and/or its authorized representatives such as a health officer/inspector. 
Health officer/inspector means an official appointed by the Peach County Board of Health who is responsible for licensing, permitting, and inspection of body art establishments (i.e. health authority). 
Hot water means water that attains and maintains a minimum temperature of 110°F. 
Imminent health hazard means any condition, deficiency, or practice, as discovered by the health authority which, if not corrected, is very likely to result in disease transmission, injury, or loss of life to any person. If an imminent health hazard exists because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, interruption of electrical or water service for two or more hours, sewage malfunction, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset of an apparent blood borne illness outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstances that may endanger public health, then operations are immediately discontinued and the Peach County Health Authority is notified. 
Instruments means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure. 
ISO means the International Standards Organization. 
Jewelry means any ornament used in any body art procedure which is inserted into a newly pierced area and meets the following minimum Association of Professional Piercers standards (adopted February 5, 2009 or subsequent adoptions): 
(1)  Steel that is ASTM F-138 compliant or ISO 5832-1 compliant. 
(2)  Steel that is ISO 10993-6, 10993-10, and/or 10993-11 compliant (EEC Nickel Directive compliant). 
(3)  Titanium (Ti6A/4V EL1) that is ASTM F-136 compliant or ISO 5832-3 compliant. 
(4)  Titanium that is ASTM-67 compliant. 
(5)  Solid 14 karat gold or higher, nickel-free white or yellow gold (purity verification must be available for inspection upon request). 
(6)  Solid nickel-free platinum alloy. 
(7)  Niobium (Nb). 
(8)  Fused quartz glass, lead-free borosilicate or lead-free soda-lime glass. 
(9)  Polymers (plastics) as follows: 
a.  Tygon medical surgical tubing S-50HL or S-54HL. 
b.  Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) that is ASTM F754-00 compliant. 
c.  Any plastic material that is ISO 10993-6, 10993-10 and/or 10993-11 compliant and/or meets the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) Class VI material classification. 
(10)  All threaded or press-fit jewelry must have internal tapping (no threads on posts). 
(11)  For body jewelry purposes, surfaces and ends must be smooth, free of nicks, scratches, burrs and polishing compounds; metals must have a consistent mirror finish. 
Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards, must be available for inspection on request. 
Lavatory facilities means a lavatory providing an adequate supply of potable hot and cold running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. The facility shall include a soap dispenser, soap, and single use disposable towels in a covered dispenser. 
Law means any applicable provision of the State of Georgia statutes and rules of any department or agency. 
License shall mean a document issued by the Peach County Health Authority pursuant to this body art regulation authorizing an individual to conduct allowed body art procedures. 
Microbiological monitoring for quality control means the use of a standard spore, to challenge the sterilization process. 
Minor means an individual under the age of 18. 
NSF means the National Sanitation Foundation. 
Occupational exposure means a specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact skin, or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials resulting from the performance of an employee's activities. 
Operator/owner means any person, firm, company, corporation or association that owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages a body art establishment. 
OSHA means the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
Other potentially infectious material means the following human body fluids: semen, vaginal secretions, saliva, and any other body fluid visibly contaminated with blood. 
Parenteral means piercing mucous membranes or the skin barrier through such events as needle sticks and piercings. 
Permit means health authority approval in writing authorizing the administrative body to operate a body art establishment for the purpose of engaging in the practice or business of body art procedures. Health authority approval shall be granted solely for the practice of body art pursuant to these regulations. 
Person means an individual, any form of business or social organization or any other non-governmental legal entity, including but not limited to corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts or unincorporated organizations. 
Personal protective equipment means specialized clothing or equipment, such as gloves or lap cloth, worn by an employee for protection against a hazard. General work clothes not intended to function as protection against a hazard are not considered to be personal protective equipment. 
Personnel means the permit holder, any person who performs body art, individuals having supervisory or management duties, or any other person employed or working in a body art establishment. This individual may or may not be a body artist. 
Physician or osteopath means an individual licensed to practice medicine in Georgia. 
Pierce or piercing means body piercing (see definition [for "body piercing]). 
Potable water means water that is from an approved water system meeting Georgia Safe Drinking Water Standards that is safe for drinking. 
Premises means the physical location of an establishment which offers and performs body art procedures. 
Professional means a person approved by the body art advisory committee to oversee apprenticeships in body art establishments. A piercing professional oversees piercing apprenticeships only. A tattoo professional oversees tattoo apprenticeships only. 
Proof of age means a driver's license or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 16 or 18 years of age or older as applicable, contains a photograph, and appears to be valid. 
Registration means license or permit as applicable to each entity. 
Safe materials means articles manufactured for the specific purpose of body art procedures which are unlikely to cause injury or disease under proper use and care. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized means the application of a U.S. EPA registered sanitizer on a cleaned surface by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the microorganism level, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment in accordance with the label instructions. 
Sewage means human excreta, all water-carried waste, and wastes from residences, buildings, or commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sharps means any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa. 
Sharps container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal that is labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol; specifically made for the disposal of sharps; required and regulated by OSHA. 
Single-use means disposable products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are properly disposed of by appropriate measures after use on each client. Single-use items include but are not limited to cotton swabs or balls, single-use instruments, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. May also be defined as "single-service." 
Solid waste means refuse, garbage, trash, rubbish, and any other item(s) which could cause an unsanitary condition or undesirable health and safety conditions. 
Spore means a dormant, non-reproductive body able to survive adverse environmental conditions including high temperatures, dryness, and lack of nourishment for long periods of time. Under the proper conditions, the spore may revert to an actively multiplying form of the bacteria, fungi, or protozoa. 
Spore test means a biological monitoring process in which resistant spore growth on test media is process in a studio's autoclave to verify that it is functioning properly. A third party culturing service must be engaged for this process to provide documentation serving as a tangible record and legal document verifying the autoclave's ability to achieve proper sterilization. 
Sterilization or sterilize means the use of a physical or chemical procedure by which all forms of microbial life, including bacteria, viruses, spores, and fungi are destroyed including highly resistant bacterial endospores. This is achieved by holding in a commercial, class B autoclave according to manufacturer's instructions as approved by the health authority. 
Sterilized indicator means a tape, strip, bag, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
Sterilizer means an autoclave certified to meet generally accepted medical standards. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin of any person by pricking in, inserting, or implanting pigments to include cosmetic micropigmentation, except when performed by a physician licensed as such pursuant to Chapter 34 of Title 43. 
Tattoo artist means a person at least 18 years of age who engages in the practice/service of tattooing regardless of the type of tattoo or area to be tattooed. 
Tattoo establishment, tattoo parlor, tattoo studio means any permanent building or structure on a fixed foundation, holding a valid city or county business license, if applicable, and permit from the Peach County Board of Health, where tattooing is performed, including any area under the control of the operator. 
Temporary body art establishment shall mean any location, place, facility or business, whereby an operator has been granted a permit to practice body art by the health authority for no more than a period of seven consecutive days only for the purpose of product demonstration in connection with conventions or industry trade shows. 
Ultrasonic cleaning unit means a unit approved by the Peach County Health Authority with a lid, physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of high energy and high frequency oscillations transmitted through the contained liquid. 
Universal precautions means treating all blood and body fluids as if they contain blood borne pathogens and taking proper precautions to prevent the spread of any blood borne pathogens. 
Utensil means any implement, tool, or other similar device used in the storage, preparation, operation, or processing of body art. 
Violation correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting these rules and regulations of the local board of health. 
Waste means solid waste, sewage, blood and body fluids or other waste resulting from the operation of a body art studio. 
Work area, work station means an area where clients receive body art. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § III, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-34. - Administrative body. 
(a)  The administrative body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. Ch. 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the Peach County Board of Health, including but not limited to all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  The administrative body shall certify in its application the name(s) and exact duties of employees/artists who have been designated as being responsible for carrying out the rules and policies adopted by the administrative body. The following information shall be included: Social security number or valid driver's license, date of birth, gender, home address, home/work phone numbers, identification photos of all operators/technicians. 
(c)  Prior to being granted a permit, each body art studio shall develop a written statement of policies and standard operating procedures including: 
(1)  Sterilization. 
(2)  Employee health. 
(3)  Employee drug and alcohol use. 
(4)  Sanitizing areas and equipment between clients. 
(5)  Disposal of waste. 
(6)  Record keeping. 
(7)  Client screening. 
(8)  Aftercare. 
(9)  Emergency sterilization. 
(d)  Prohibited facilities. 
(1)  Neither body art studios nor body art procedures shall be allowed in the same structures or areas used for private residences, other structures used for human habitation, food services, retail sales, grocery stores, convenience stores, or similar locations; however, this does not prohibit body art operations in completely separate areas of certain businesses considered safe and appropriate by the environmental health specialist and his or her supervisor. 
(2)  Body art studios shall not be allowed in automobiles, mobile, transitory or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include, but are not limited to, mobile trailers, tents, and recreational vehicles. 
(e)  Prohibited procedures. 
(1)  Implants, 3-D procedures or other procedures involving insertion of foreign objects completely under the skin are prohibited. 
(2)  Any body art procedure that results in the permanent removal of tissue or requiring medical equipment (ex. scalpels, dermal punches) shall be prohibited, except that a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath shall be authorized to perform such procedures. 
(3)  Ear piercings involving cartilage may not be performed utilizing spring-loaded guns. 
(4)  The following acts will be prohibited: scarification (branding, cutting, skin peeling,) suspension piercing, neck rings, foot binding, corseting, play piercing, surface/microdermal anchors. 
(f)  Artists and facilities must meet all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations to include local, state, and federal prior to being permitted and while in operation. 
(g)  Body artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(h)  Operators shall refuse services to any person who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(i)  A body artist shall not provide service to any person who shows evidence of being mentally incapacitated. 
(j)  Live animals shall be excluded from within the body art studio and from adjacent areas within the facility under the control of the permit holder. However, this exclusion does not apply to fish in clean, maintained aquariums which are maintained outside of an artist work area. Service animals accompanying disabled persons shall be permitted in the establishment. 
(k)  A body artist shall not conduct any form of body art activity upon any area of a client that evidences the presence of any rash, lesion or other visible signs of infection. 
(l)  Any future body art procedures not covered within these rules which have the potential for transmitting infectious disease must receive written departmental approval prior to being offered to customers or patrons. 
(m)  Body art shall only be performed by currently licensed body artists, guest artists, or apprentices in a permitted body art establishment or temporary facility meeting the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § V, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-35. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Each studio where body art procedures are administered shall provide work areas separate from observers or visitors. Body artists shall not perform body art procedures simultaneously on different clients in the same work area. 
(b)  Work areas shall provide complete privacy for clients by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partitions that extend from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  A body art establishment shall have a cleaning room to be used exclusively for the cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization of instruments. 
(1)  The cleaning room shall have a separate ANSI-approved instrument sink or stainless steel sink reserved only for instrument disinfectant activities and shall be equipped with hot and cold running water. 
(2)  The cleaning room shall be separated from any other area in the facility by means of doors, nonabsorbent curtains, or similar approved partition extending from floor to ceiling or a height of ten feet and must be labeled to prevent clients from entering the room. 
(3)  The cleaning room shall be equipped with an ultrasonic cleaning unit and a medical grade autoclave. The autoclave shall be used to sterilize all non-disposable and reusable body art equipment. 
(4)  The instrument sink, ultrasonic cleaning unit, and autoclave shall each be separated by a minimum distance of 48 inches, unless using a splashguard approved by the health authority. 
(5)  The cleaning room walls, floors, doors, windows, skylight, and other components shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent, durable material and be maintained in good repair. 
(d)  A hand washing sink shall be provided within each workstation hand wash sinks will also be made available in the cleaning rooms. These are in addition to the required sinks in toilet rooms. Facilities that are open and operating at the time these rules are implemented will be required to have one hand wash sink that is available by an unobstructed pathway within 30 feet of each work station not to include any hand wash sinks in toilet rooms. 
(e)  Hand washing sinks and instrument sinks shall be used for those intended purposes only. 
(f)  Mop sinks will be required upon new construction or renovation. After adoption of these rules, mop sinks will be required for any new facility or upon renovation to any existing facility or any major plumbing renovation that occurs. At least one mop sink/service sink or one curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and trash cans as well as for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. 
(g)  The use of common towels and cloths is prohibited for any reason. 
(h)  Sanitary facilities and controls. 
(1)  Water supply. 
a.  Enough potable water for the needs of the body art studio shall be provided from an approved source that is a public water system; or a nonpublic water system that is constructed, maintained and operated according to applicable state or local codes. 
b.  Water from a public water system shall meet 40 CFR 141—National Primary Drinking Water Regulations and state drinking water quality standards. 
c.  Water from a nonpublic system shall meet state drinking water quality standards. 
1.  Water from a nonpublic water system shall be sampled and tested at least annually for biological and chemical contaminants to ensure complaints with safe drinking water standards and quarterly as required by health authority water quality regulations. 
2.  The most recent sample report for the nonpublic water system shall be retained on file in the body art establishment and a copy sent to the health department at the time received. 
(2)  Sewage. All sewage, including liquid water, shall be disposed of by a public sewerage system or by an approved on-site sewage disposal system. 
(3)  Plumbing. Plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to law. There shall be no cross-connection between the potable water supply and any other water supply or other possible source of contamination. 
(i)  Toilet facilities. 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of one restroom containing a toilet and a lavatory readily accessible to anybody artist, client, or customer that does not require passage through a clean room and work area. 
(2)  Toilet installation. Toilet facilities shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. Public access to toilet facilities shall not be through cleaning rooms or work areas with the exception that access through such areas will be allowed if the risk of contamination is determined to be minimal. 
(3)  Toilet rooms. Toilet rooms opening directly into work or client waiting areas shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, solid self-closing doors, which shall be closed except during cleaning or maintenance. 
(4)  All toilet rooms shall have sufficient mechanical ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(5)  Toilet fixtures. Toilet fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. A supply of toilet tissue shall be provided at each toilet at all times. Easily cleanable receptacles with trash liners shall be provided for waste materials. Toilet rooms shall have at least one covered waste receptacle. 
(j)  Lavatory Facilities. 
(1)  Lavatory installation. Lavatory facilities shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to law. All lavatories that may be used for hand washing by employees shall be designed such that they are operable without use of hands. 
(2)  Lavatory faucets. Each lavatory shall be provided with hot water at a temperature at least 100°F (38°C). Hot and cold water shall be tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination faucet. Any self-closing, slow-closing, or metering faucet used shall be designed to provide a flow of water for at least 20 seconds without the need to reactivate the faucet. 
(3)  Lavatory supplies. A soap dispenser and a supply of antiseptic, hand-cleaning soap or detergent shall be available at each lavatory. A fully covered or enclosed towel dispenser with a supply of single use sanitary towels shall be conveniently located near each lavatory. Easily cleanable covered waste receptacles shall be conveniently located near the hand washing facilities. 
(4)  Lavatory maintenance. Lavatories, soap dispensers, paper towel dispensers, and all related fixtures shall be kept clean, in good repair, and supplied at all times. 
(k)  Mop sinks. At least one mop sink or one curbed cleaning facility equipped with a floor drain shall be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and trash cans and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste in accordance [with] section 28-35(e). 
(l)  Solid waste. 
(1)  Non-biomedical waste containers. 
a.  Garbage and refuse shall be kept in durable, easily cleaned containers that do not leak and do not absorb liquids. 
b.  All outside refuse containers shall be covered and maintained. 
c.  Containers used in work areas shall be kept covered when not in use and after they are filled. At least one covered/lidded waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area. Receptacles in the body artist area shall be emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly or more if necessary. 
d.  There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all the garbage and refuse that accumulate. 
(2)  Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of at such frequency to prevent the development of odor and the attraction of insects, rodents, or vermin. 
(3)  Biomedical waste containment. 
a.  Disposal of infectious waste such as blood, fluids, used inks, or other liquid waste may be deposited directly into a drain connected to an approved sewer system or on-site sewage system. 
b.  Containment of biomedical waste shall be in a manner and location which affords protection from animals, rain and wind, does not provide a breeding place or a food source for insects and rodents, and minimizes exposure to the public. 
c.  Biomedical waste shall be segregated by separate containment from other waste at the point of origin. 
d.  Biomedical waste, except for sharps, shall be placed in containers which are impervious to moisture and have strength sufficient to preclude ripping, tearing, or bursting under normal conditions of use. The containers shall be securely closed so as to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid wastes during storage, handling, or transport. 
e.  Sharps shall be contained for storage, transportation, treatment and subsequent disposal in leak-proof, rigid, puncture-resistant containers which are taped closed or tightly lidded to preclude loss of contents. 
1.  Rigid containers of discarded sharps and all other disposable containers used for containment of biomedical waste shall be red or orange in color and clearly identified with the universal biohazard symbol or clearly marked with the word "biohazard". 
2.  Biomedical waste contained in disposable containers as prescribed above, shall be placed for storage, handling, or transport in disposable or reusable pails, cartons, boxes, drums, or portable bins. The containment system shall have a tight fitting cover and be kept clean and in good repair. The containers may be of any color and shall be conspicuously labeled with the universal biohazard symbol and the word "biohazard" on the sides so as to be readily visible from any lateral direction when the container is upright. 
3.  Reusable containers used for shipment of biomedical waste shall be thoroughly washed and decontaminated each time they are emptied. Reusable pails, drums, dumpsters or bins used for containment of biomedical waste shall not be used for other purposes. 
4.  Container must be mounted at a height of 56 inches to 52 inches at a standing workstation, and 42 inches to 38 inches for a seated workstation. 
(m)  The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the entrance, harborage, or feeding of insects, rodents, or vermin. 
(n)  Physical facilities, floors, walls, ceilings, and attached equipment: Floors, walls, ceilings, and attached equipment and decorative materials shall be kept clean and maintained in good repair. 
(1)  Floors. 
a.  Floors and floor coverings of all work areas, dressing rooms, locker rooms, toilet rooms and vestibules shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent, hard durable material and maintained in good repair. 
b.  The floor and wall juncture shall have coved joint installed. 
c.  The floor and cove base/joint shall be properly sealed. 
d.  Carpeting is allowed in the lobby area only and shall be of closely woven construction, properly installed, easily cleanable, and maintained in good repair. 
(2)  Walls and ceilings. 
a.  Maintenance. Walls and ceilings, including doors, windows, skylight, and similar closures shall be constructed of smooth, nonabsorbent, durable material and be maintained in good repair. 
b.  Attachments. Light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans, and similar equipment attached to walls and ceilings shall be easily cleanable and maintained in good repair. 
c.  Existing facilities may have ceilings that are exempted from requirements for smooth, nonabsorbent materials until such time as repair or extensive maintenance is required. At that time, materials must comply with this chapter. 
(o)  Lighting. 
(1)  Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at least 50-foot candles of light on all work area surfaces and at equipment washing work levels. 
(2)  Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be installed to provide at a distance of 30 inches from the floor at least ten-foot candles of light in all other areas. 
(p)  Ventilation. All rooms shall have sufficient ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke, and fumes. 
(q)  Poisonous or toxic materials. 
(1)  Materials permitted. There shall be present in the body art studio only those poisonous or toxic materials necessary for maintaining the establishment and cleaning or sanitizing equipment, as well as controlling insects and rodents. 
(2)  Labeling of materials. Containers of poisonous or toxic materials shall be prominently and distinctly labeled according to law for easy identification of contents and approved for intended use. 
(3)  Toxic items shall be separated from other materials used in body art procedures by way of a closed cabinet. 
(4)  Spray bottles labeled with contents may be used for the purpose of cleaning but not for body art procedure preparation. 
(r)  Premises. 
(1)  Body art establishments shall be kept neat, clean, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(2)  Only articles necessary for the operation and maintenance of the body art establishment shall be stored on or within the establishment. Lockers or other designated area will be provided for such personal items as purses, jackets, medications, etc. 
(3)  Aisles and working spaces. Aisles and working spaces between units of equipment and walls shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees to perform their duties readily without contamination of equipment or of operational surfaces by clothing or personal contact. 
(s)  Equipment and utensils. 
(1)  Materials. 
a.  Multi-use equipment and utensils shall be constructed and repaired with safe materials, including finishing materials; they shall be corrosion-resistant and nonabsorbent; and they shall be smooth, easily cleanable, and durable under conditions of normal use. Single-service articles shall be made from clean, sanitary, and safe materials. 
b.  Re-use of single-service articles is prohibited. 
(2)  Design and fabrication. 
a.  General. All equipment and utensils, including plastic ware, shall be designed and fabricated for durability under conditions of normal use and shall be resistant to denting, buckling, pitting, and chipping. 
1.  Body art operational surfaces shall be easily cleanable, smooth, and free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections, as well as free of difficult to clean internal corners and crevices. 
2.  Sinks and drain boards shall be self-draining. 
b.  Operational surfaces. Surfaces of equipment not intended as operational surfaces, but which are exposed to splash or debris or which otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be designed and fabricated to be smooth, washable, free of unnecessary ledges, projections, or crevices and readily accessible for cleaning. Such surfaces shall be of material and in such repair as to be easily maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
c.  Needles, needle assembly with bar, dyes, or pigments shall be designed and manufactured for the sole purpose of body art. 
(t)  Minimum supplies of establishment. Each work station is to be equipped or stocked in the following manner: 
(1)  Body tattooing establishments: 
a.  A minimum of six commercially packaged single use presterilized needle assembly with bar and six sterilized needle tubes; 
[(2)]  Body piercing establishments: 
a.  A minimum of six commercially packaged single use presterilized needles, six sterilized needle tubes, six sterilized forceps, and six sterilized hemostats; 
b.  A minimum of six single-use pens or equivalent instruments. 
(3)  A minimum of four extra packages of disposable towels other than the package that is being used; 
(4)  A minimum of three extra boxes of medical grade disposable gloves other than the box being used; 
(5)  An extra supply of bandages, ointment or gel, and antimicrobial soap. 
(u)  Temporary facilities shall meet the requirements of these regulations. In addition, the following will be required: 
(1)  Hand washing facilities must be located within each work or demonstration area. In the absence of a hand wash station meeting the requirements of the chapter, the following will be allowed: 
a.  Hand washing facilities shall consist of liquid antimicrobial hand soap, single-use paper towels and hot potable water dispensed from an insulated container that contains at least five gallons of potable water with a spigot that is raised a minimum of 25 inches off the floor. 
b.  Waste water shall be collected in a bucket that will hold at least five gallons of waste water placed on the floor under the spigot. Warm potable water shall be replenished and wastewater removed as necessary to the sanitary sewer system, or, in the absence thereof, in a manner approved by the department. 
(2)  Only single-use, disposable, sterilized supplies can be used. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § VI, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-36. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body art studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and non-absorbent. 
(b)  All surfaces in the work room that could potentially be contaminated during a procedure must be non-porous to allow for proper cleaning. This includes but is not limited to: work tables, chair mats and bases, shelving, and counters. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each body artist. 
(1)  All exposed surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material, which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  All exposed surfaces of work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with an antimicrobial solution approved by the health authority after each use and between clients. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § VII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-37. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the work area and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials intended for single-use applied to the human skin shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(c)  Cabinets and closed, sealable containers for the storage of instruments, pigments, single use articles (ex., gloves, ink caps, carbon, stencils, etc.) shall be provided for each body artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § VIII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-38. - Personnel—Health and hygiene. 
(a)  With the exception of a plain ring such as a wedding band, body artist jewelry on hands and wrists such as watches, rings, bracelets, etc., shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(b)  Prior to the procedure, the artist shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage shall be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. Recent tattoos or piercings in the healing process shall also be properly covered as to prevent any bodily fluid transfer. 
(c)  Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(d)  The artist must thoroughly wash their hands in hot, running water with antibacterial soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels before and after performing body art procedures or anytime there is an interruption in body art procedure that requires the artist to remove and replace gloves. Use of hand sanitizers are recommended after each hand washing. 
(e)  Medical grade, single-use, disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the body art procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one individual. Vinyl gloves are not allowed. 
(f)  A body artist shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness, conform to standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body art procedures. Single-use aprons, smocks, or sleeve covers are acceptable. Open-toed shoes or shoes with holes shall not be permissible. 
(g)  The skin of the artist shall be free of rash or infection. No artist affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood that the individual could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(h)  Universal precautions, as defined in these rules, shall be observed to prevent contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials. All employees shall be trained in universal precautions and present documentation of yearly training upon request. 
(1)  Assume all human blood, plasma, serum, body fluids (semen, saliva, breast milk, vaginal secretions and any fluid contaminated with blood) and tissues to be contaminated with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and/or Hepatitis viruses (e.g., HBV, HCV). 
(2)  The most susceptible route of occupational infection for HIV, HBV, and HCV is by accidental needle sticks, but may include contamination of the mucous membranes, or through broken, abraded, or irritated skin. Use appropriate caution and maximum protection to prevent such contact. 
(3)  Proper decontamination procedures, emergency biohazard spill management, and proper use of biosafety equipment shall be utilized. 
(4)  Use aseptic technique. Thorough hand washing is essential after client contact, after handling blood and body fluids, after wearing gloves, and prior to exiting the work area. 
(5)  Infectious material spills shall be cleaned using an EPA registered disinfectant and universal precautions. 
(6)  Clean all work areas and equipment used in handling human biohazardous materials with an EPA-registered disinfectant when concluding work to protect personnel from accidental infection. 
(7)  Eating, use of tobacco products, and applying cosmetics or lip balm are not permitted in the work area. Drinking will be allowed only when a single-use cup that has a secure lid and straw is used in a way as to prevent the contamination of the artist's hands. 
(8)  All procedures shall be performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 
(9)  Employees shall report all work related accidents, incidents, and unexplained illness to your supervisor and/or physician immediately. 
(10)  Soiled gloves shall be removed in a manner to minimize the risk of self-contamination or cross-contamination after each operation and prior to contacting work surfaces, door knobs, wall switches, or telephones. Dispose of used gloves in a bagged trash container. 
(11)  Food storage cabinets or refrigerators shall be located outside the work area. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § IX, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-39. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An ultrasonic cleaning unit and operational medical-grade autoclave (Class B) shall be provided in each body art studio. 
(b)  Ultrasonic cleaning units shall be clearly labeled "biohazardous" and shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(c)  The ultrasonic cleaning unit and medical grade autoclave shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. Each ultrasonic cleaning unit and medical-grade autoclave shall be emptied and thoroughly cleaned and disinfected per manufacturer's recommendations. Ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave maintenance records must be maintained for two years and be made available upon request. 
(d)  Used non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate labeled, puncture-resistant container until cleaned. The cleaning method shall include the following: 
(1)  Instruments should be pre-scrubbed prior to being placed into an ultrasonic cleaning unit. 
(2)  After removal from the ultrasonic cleaning unit, instruments should then be brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, then rinsed in clean water. 
(3)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled as to contents, initialed, dated and sealed. If multiple autoclaves are in use, the autoclave used must be designated on the packaging. 
(4)  Instruments shall then be packed individually in sterilized packs and sterilized in a medical-grade autoclave. All sterilized packs shall contain either a sterilized indicator or internal temperature indicator. 
(5)  Each autoclave bag must be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and may hold no more than one individual item (ex. one tube or needle bar). A piercing set may be bagged together. 
(e)  After sterilization, the packaged instruments shall be stored in a clean dry cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved and labeled for storage of sterile instruments. 
(f)  If a sterilized package has been breached or allowed to get wet, the instrument(s) must be re-packaged and sterilized again before use. 
(g)  A log of sterilization procedures shall be maintained near the sterilizing equipment. Included in the log shall be type of load, quantity of load, temperature, pressure and length of sterilizing time. 
(h)  Spore indicators shall be used a minimum of at least once a month unless the manufacturer specifies more frequent monitoring or after 40 hours of usage, whichever comes first, and the results must be kept on-site for a minimum of two years. An independent commercial testing laboratory contracted by the operator/ body artist or both shall perform monthly biological spore testing of the autoclave. A provision shall be included in the contract between the operator or body artist (or both) with the commercial testing laboratory requiring the commercial testing facility to notify the Peach County Health Authority of any failure of the autoclave to eradicate all living organisms, including spores. 
(i)  Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function and the operator shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report. Any items remaining bagged after sterilization must be reprocessed and sterilized by an autoclave approved for use prior to return to service. Three consecutive negative biological tests must be achieved before the studio is reopened. The studio shall have the option to obtain a properly functioning sterilizer with a negative biological report in order to remain open or if the studio has more than one autoclave in operation they may be given approval to remain open. The health authority will consider the body art studio's emergency plan should autoclave failure or malfunction occur. 
(j)  Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § X, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-40. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from commercial professional suppliers specifically manufactured as dyes and/or pigments only for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing or mixing of dyes or pigments, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Dyes or pigments shall be mixed and placed in sterile individual single-use containers. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container(s) shall be properly discarded along with the container(s). 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XI, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-41. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment for a tattoo procedure and during the procedure. Vinyl gloves are not permissible. 
(b)  Only a commercially packaged, single-use, pre-sterilized needle assembly with bar shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture-proof, autoclavable container, or disposable biohazard container. 
(c)  Sterilized instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(d)  Any part of a tattooing machine that may be touched by the artist during the procedure shall be covered with a disposable plastic sheath that is discarded after each procedure and the machine shall be disinfected. 
(e)  A clip cord sleeve and barrier film shall be used over exposed electrical cords or other approved cleaning and disinfection methods demonstrated to prevent contamination. 
(f)  All devices used to apply pigments must be designed and used to prevent backflow of pigments into the machine. 
(g)  Single-use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(h)  If shaving is necessary, single-use disposable razors shall be used and discarded between clients and as otherwise needed. 
(i)  After shaving the area to be tattooed, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be cleaned with soap and water, rinsed with clean water, and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before each placement of design on the skin. 
(j)  When a workstation rinse cup is used alone, the cup and solution shall be disposable and discarded after each client. 
(k)  If squirt bottles are used to dispense liquids, the liquid shall be squirted onto a single-use wipe rather than directly onto the client. 
(l)  Single-use ointment tubes, applicators, and supplies shall be discarded after each tattoo application. 
(m)  When a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. The use of roll-on or stick deodorants for tattoo site preparation is prohibited. 
(n)  The stencil shall be applied with antimicrobial soap or a health authority-approved product dispensed from a container in a manner that does not contaminate the unused portion. 
(o)  When the design is drawn directly onto the skin, autoclavable, pre-sterilized, pens shall be used or single-use, non-toxic pens or markers shall be used and discarded after each use. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-42. - Body piercing preparation. 
(a)  Medical grade disposable gloves shall be worn during the preparation of equipment for a piercing procedure and during the procedure. Vinyl gloves are not permissible. 
(b)  Only a commercially packaged, single-use, pre-sterilized piercing needle shall be used and disposed of immediately after use into a puncture proof, auto-clavable container, or disposable biohazard container. No approved tool may be modified and used for anything other than its intended use. 
(c)  Pre-sterilize all forceps, hemostats, calipers, and tubes in sealed, properly labeled, sterile indicator bags. These items are to be used on one person, in one sitting. After one such use, they must be cleaned in an ultrasonic cleaner, placed in sealed indicator bags, properly labeled, autoclaved and stored in sterile indicator bags. 
(d)  Sterilized instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front of the client. 
(e)  Single-use towels or gauze shall be used in preparing the piercing site and shall be disposed of after use on each patron or client. 
(f)  If shaving is necessary, single-use disposable razors shall be used and discarded between clients and as otherwise needed. 
(g)  After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be shaved, the piercing site shall be cleaned with soap and water, rinsed with clean water, and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary manner before beginning the procedure. 
(h)  In the case of oral piercings, the operator shall provide the individual with antimicrobial mouthwash in a single-use cup and shall ensure that the individual utilizes the mouthwash provided and rinses for a minimum of 30 seconds prior to the procedure. In the case of a lip, labret, or cheek piercing, procedures described in this section for both skin and oral piercings shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XIII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-43. - Piercing jewelry. 
(a)  Client and body piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Jewelry used in piercing shall consist of a material rated by the ASTM or the ISO as being suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, titanium, niobium, solid platinum or a dense low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards, must be available for inspection on request. Solid 14 karat or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold may also be used. Purity verification must be available for inspection on request. 
(c)  The jewelry must be free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces. 
(d)  All jewelry must be properly sterilized prior to use in a medical grade autoclave, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. Any two-piece or multi-piece jewelry that is screwed or pieced together must be separated prior to sterilization. 
(e)  Should jewelry become contaminated during the piercing process, a sterile piece of jewelry must be used or re-sterilization must occur. 
(f)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for ear lobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by body piercers. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XIV, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-44. - Body art after care. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antimicrobial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment or other approved product from a single-use collapsible or plastic tube. 
(c)  A sterile bandage or dressing shall then be applied to the tattoo using a sealed non-sticking pad or wrap. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the Peach County Health Authority for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instruction shall include, at a minimum: what to do, what to avoid, suggested care solutions/over-the-counter balms or treatments, cleaning instructions, and what to look for during the healing process. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and will contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. The instructions will also list the name, address and phone number of the environmental health section of the health department advising the client to call with questions regarding the facility. The document shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records for a minimum of three years after the procedure. 
(e)  Use either one or both of the following after care solutions for body piercing: 
(1)  Packaged sterile saline solution with no additives (read the label) or non-iodized sea salt mixture. 
(2)  Liquid anti-microbial or germicidal soap. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XV, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-45. - Disinfection of workplace. 
(a)  Each body art studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a written cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. 
(b)  This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. 
(c)  The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)  A body artist shall only conduct body art activities under sterile conditions. 
(2)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate EPA-registered disinfectant after completion of the body art procedures and at the end of the work shift or when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(3)  Remove and replace protective coverings after each body art procedure. 
(4)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XVI, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-46. - Disposal of biomedical waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during body art procedures, shall be placed in puncture-resistant, closed containers immediately after use, handled and disposed of according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Used needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Contaminated waste, which may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled, must be placed in an approved "red bag", which is marked with the international biohazard symbol. 
(d)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(e)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(f)  Biomedical waste shall not be stored outdoors unless in a secured, locked container, or comply with county/city solid waste ordinances. 
(g)  All regulated wastes shall be separated from non-regulated waste, disposed of in labeled, manufacturer's color-coded waste containers with color-coded, puncture-resistant bags and shall be removed from the premises by a disposal company certified to handle biohazard waste products. Waste hauler manifests for contaminated waste transport and disposal must be kept on-site for three years and be presented for inspection upon request. 
(1)  All sharps must be immediately placed after use in puncture resistant containers that are approved for the use of regulated waste. 
a.  Sharps containers must not be allowed to overfill, must be used according to manufacturer's instructions 
(h)  Transfer of biomedical waste to off-site treatment or disposal facilities. 
(1)  Any generator of biomedical waste shall transfer custody of the waste only to a collector who is operating under authority of these rules. 
(2)  All biomedical waste generated by a facility must have custody of the waste transferred only to a collector who is operating under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 391-3-4.15 as amended. The disposal of biomedical waste generated by a tattoo or body piercing facility by landfilling is prohibited. 
(i)  Regulated waste, including sharps, must be removed from the body art establishment when the container reaches its maximum load as indicated by the size of the container not to exceed 90 days. Documentation of regulated waste removal must be maintained for three years 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XVII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-47. - Client files. 
(a)  Every client shall complete an application and consent form approved by the Peach County Health Authority prior to having any body art activity performed upon or to their body. Minors must have permission for piercings (where allowed). 
(b)  The application and consent form shall contain a minimum of the following: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Age; 
(3)  In the case of piercings for a minor client, the parent's or legal guardian's name, proof of parentage or legal guardianship through a copy of a birth certificate or court order of guardianship respectively, or a notarized document signed by the parent or legal guardian attesting to the parent's or legal guardian's relationship to the minor client and the consent to conduct the contemplated body art activity upon the minor client; 
(4)  A brief description of the body art activity to be performed; 
(5)  The phone number of the county health department and instructions for the client, or in the case of a minor client the minor client and his/her parent or legal guardian, to contact the health department with any complaint, question or concern regarding safety, sanitization or sterilization procedures; 
(6)  The name of the body artist who is to conduct the body art upon the client or minor client and the artist's license number; 
(7)  Signature of the client, or in the case of a minor client - the signature of the client's parent or legal guardian signed in the presence of the body artist; 
(8)  The signature of the body artist; and 
(9)  The date(s) of all signatures. 
(c)  A client shall inform the body artist of any known chronic medical or communicable conditions, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Diabetes; 
(2)  History of hemophilia; 
(3)  History of skin disease, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soap, disinfectants, etc.; 
(4)  History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes or other skin sensitivities; 
(5)  History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting or narcolepsy; 
(6)  The taking of medications such as aspirin or other anticoagulants, which thin the blood and or interfere with blood clotting; 
(7)  History of or suspicion of adverse reaction to latex or products containing latex; 
(8)  History of keloid formation. 
(d)  A client shall inform the body artist of a known pregnancy or possibility of a pregnancy. 
(e)  The body artist shall inform the client, verbally and in writing that the health conditions outlined in (3) and (4) may increase health risks associated with receiving a body art procedure. 
(f)  The body artist shall require the client to sign a release form confirming that information in (3) and (4) was obtained or attempted to be obtained and the client refused to disclose the same. 
(g)  For each client, proper records of identification, an application and consent form, a description and location of the body art received, and copies of the following forms shall be kept and retained for a minimum of three years at the studio: 
(1)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. 
(2)  Procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the body art. 
(3)  A copy of an informational sheet signed by the client informing them of the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the body art procedure. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XVIII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-48. - Personnel—Files. 
(a)  Every applicant for a body art license or renewal of a body art license, in order to be qualified for such license, shall provide to the Peach County Health Authority evidence of satisfaction of the following: 
(1)  Health department exam; 
(2)  Current certification in Peach County Health Department-approved basic first aid and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation; 
(3)  Successful completion of a course on prevention of disease transmission and blood borne pathogen compliance with the OSHA guidelines given or approved by the health department; 
(4)  Satisfactory completion of a least two years actual experience in the practice of performing body art activities of the kind for which a license is sought, whether such experience was obtained within or outside of the county, or evidence of a completed apprenticeship program approved by the body art advisory committee. Two years' experience is defined as 2,400 hours of actual experience as outlined by the body art advisory committee. if the experience or apprenticeship was obtained outside the county, the body art advisory committee will make a recommendation to the Peach County Board of Health or their representative after review of all applicable information which then will make a determination regarding qualification for licensure; and 
(5)  Hepatitis B Vaccination Status—Disclosure. An applicant for a body art license shall provide the health authority, and shall provide to the owner of any body art establishment in which the applicant intends to perform or in which he does perform body art activity, valid documentation of his Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) vaccination status stating: 
a.  Laboratory evidence of immunity; 
b.  Documentation stating the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons; Contraindications require a dated and signed licensed health care professional's statement specifying the name of the body artist license applicant or employee and that the vaccine cannot be given; or 
c.  Signed certificate of vaccination declination of HBV for medical or religious reasons. 
(b)  The owner or governing body of each body art facility must maintain a file on all employees (including apprentices) who perform body art procedures. Employee files must be kept on location for the duration of the person's employment and for a minimum of three years after the person is no longer employed. The employee files must be available for inspection and include all items listed in (a)(1)—(4) above and include a copy of a photo ID. 
(c)  If the artist is currently in business at the time of application for the permit and it is prior to the effective date of these rules, the above certifications/trainings must be obtained within six months (180 days) from the date the rule adoption for the apprenticeship/experience requirement to be waived; otherwise, a license will not be granted until all conditions are met. 
(d)  The body art establishment operator shall make available, at no cost to the personnel, the Hepatitis B vaccination series, as well as any routine booster dose(s) to every person who may have occupational exposure to blood or other potentially infectious material. For new personnel, the vaccine shall be made available within ten business days of initial work assignment. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XIX, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-49. - Body art license. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining a body art license from the Peach County Health Department. Apprentices will hold an apprentice license. 
(b)  An applicant for a body art license must be a minimum of 18 years of age and shall demonstrate to the Peach County Health Authority his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and educational requirements of this body art regulation prior to the issuance or renewal of a body art/apprentice license by the health authority. 
(c)  Applicants shall submit a completed application provided by the Peach County Health Authority, pay a fee determined by the Peach County Board of Health and complete and pass a health department-approved exam or equivalent as approved by the body art advisory committee. 
(d)  Application for the body art license shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence address; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Phone number; 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist/apprentice; 
(8)  Photo identification; 
(9)  Proof of successful completion of an OSHA approved blood borne pathogen/universal precautions training program and basic first aid/CPR classes given or approved by the department; and 
(10)  Proof of completion of an approved apprenticeship [two years' experience defined as 2,400 hours of actual experience as outlined by the body art advisory committee] in a licensed establishment in Georgia or other state to include the minimum established requirements. 
(e)  No body art license will be issued without successfully completing an OSHA-approved course in blood borne pathogens/universal precautions and basic first aid/CPR. 
(f)  Acting within scope of license: A body artist shall only perform that form of body art that is indicated in the body art license application submitted to the Peach County Health Department to receive the license. 
(g)  The body art license shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed unless revoked sooner by the Peach County Health Authority. 
(h)  In order for a body art license to be renewed, continuing education classes approved by the body art advisory committee must be attended and a set renewal fee must be paid to the Peach County Health Department. Body artists must attend a department approved continuing educational class on blood borne pathogens/universal precautions every two years. 
(i)  It is understood that body artists from other states/districts/jurisdictions that do not require licensure may apply for a license. In this case, the application must be approved by the body art advisory committee. For an artist's application to be considered by the body art advisory committee, all conditions of this section must be met to include at least two years prior experience as documented by the following: 
(1)  Letter of experience (new applicants only). The letter must include: 
a.  Date, artist legal name, address, phone number and all alias'; 
b.  Facility name, facility address and phone number of where the artist desires to work; 
c.  Dates of previous employment and job duties (e.g. tattoo and/or body piercing); 
d.  Signature of owners or managers of facilities where previously employed validating prior employment and their contact information; 
e.  If items c. and d. cannot be obtained, an apprenticeship must be conducted. 
Note: If operator was self-employed, a copy of their business license is accepted as proof of experience/training. Proof will also be considered as tax records, copy of another state's tattoo artist license, or other similar city, county, state, or federal documents which show the prospective applicant as having been in business or operating for two years elsewhere. The body art advisory committee shall have final approval on other forms of documentation submitted as evidence or proof. 
(j)  All body art licenses shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area approved by the health authority upon entry to the facility as well as in each artist's work area where they may be readily observed by clients during the procedure. 
(k)  Guest body art license. 
(1)  No visiting body artist shall practice body art without a guest body art license issued by the health authority. 
(2)  The department may issue a seven day license to an individual holding a license or similar certificate or registration to engage in the practice of body art issued under the jurisdiction of another city, county, or state of the United States. Such guest body art license will allow a person to practice body art under the direct supervision of a body artist holding a valid body art license issued by the Peach County Health Authority. The issuance of a guest body art license is conditional upon the applicant demonstrating the following: 
a.  The applicant has received training equivalent to the minimum training requirement set by this body art regulation; 
b.  The applicant shall provide a letter of consent signed by a body artist licensed by the Peach County Health Authority, a copy of the body art license, and a copy of the body art facility permit where the applicant will perform body art; and 
c.  Application fee paid to the Peach Health Department. 
(3)  A body artist licensed by the health authority requesting to have a guest body artist perform under his/her supervision shall: 
a.  Require that the Guest Body Artist notify the Peach County Health Authority in writing ten days in advance of the requested date of the guest body art license; and 
b.  Require that the visiting body artist obtain a guest body art license from the Peach County Health Authority. 
(l)  Apprentice license. 
(1)  No person shall begin to learn the practice body art procedures without first obtaining an apprentice license from the Peach County Health Department. 
(2)  An applicant for an apprentice license must be a minimum of 18 years of age and shall complete the following requirements prior to the issuance of a body art license: 
a.  Proof of successful completion of an OSHA-approved blood-borne pathogen/universal precautions training program and basic first aid/CPR classes given or approved by the Peach County Health Department; 
b.  Proof of completion of an approved apprenticeship (two years' experience defined as 2,400 hours of actual experience as outlined by the body art advisory committee) in a licensed establishment in Georgia or other state to include the minimum established requirements; and 
c.  Pass a health department-approved exam or equivalent as approved by the body art advisory committee. 
(3)  Apprentice applicants shall submit a completed application provided by the Department and pay a fee determined by the Peach County Board of Health. 
(4)  Application for the apprentice license shall include: 
a.  Name; 
b.  Date of birth; 
c.  Sex; 
d.  Residence address; 
e.  Mailing address; 
f.  Phone number; 
g.  Place(s) of prior employment as an apprentice if applicable; 
h.  Photo I.D.; and 
i.  Letter of employment/apprenticeship (new applicants only). The letter must be from the owner of a permitted facility where they will be working and include: 
1.  Date, facility name, facility address and phone number. 
2.  Applicant's job duties (e.g. tattoo, and/or body piercing). 
3.  Signature of owner or manager of facility granting permission for applicant to serve as an apprentice in their facility and their contact information. 
(5)  Acting within scope of license. An apprentice shall only perform the form of body art that is indicated in the apprentice license application submitted to the Peach County Health Department to receive the license. All apprentices must work under the supervision of a body art professional relative to the area indicated on their apprentice license. 
(6)  A body art professional is a designation granted by the body art advisory committee to those individuals who make application to the Peach County Board of Health and meet the following qualifications: 
a.  Ten years' experience as a tattoo artist and/or ten years' experience as a body piercer as evidenced by documentation outlined in [subsection] (l)(4)i.1. of this section and submitted with the application; 
b.  A history of facility compliance as determined by the committee; and the 
c.  Individual must be in good standing with the Peach County Health Authority. 
(7)  The apprentice license shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(8)  All apprentice licenses shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area approved by the health authority upon entry to the facility. 
(9)  Each client must be notified in writing that the work they are receiving is being performed by an apprentice and not a fully licensed body artist. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XX, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-50. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The administrative body of each body art studio shall submit to the Peach County Health Department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No studio shall be operated and no body art performed without such permit, which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)  A new or initial application is required for a body art establishment that has not previously been permitted at the time this rule goes into effect or for instances when ownership changes. 
(c)  To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(d)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the Peach County Health Department. 
(e)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an 8 ½" x 11" or larger page containing a detailed floor drawing to scale of the body art studio. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following: windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables, sinks, bathrooms, waiting area, and all equipment placement whether affixed or not for clients and/or staff. 
(f)  Specification sheets for all equipment to be located in the facility to include tattooing machines, autoclaves, hot water heaters, etc. 
(g)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the studio shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name and nicknames of each staff person. 
(h)  The ownership of the studio shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(i)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of body art studios to include building, plumbing and electrical codes shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(j)  Prior to the issuance of the permit to new or existing establishments the applicant shall provide evidence of satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all other provisions of laws that apply to the location, construction and maintenance of body art establishments and the safety of persons therein. 
(k)  Existing establishments and personnel. 
(1)  Existing body art establishments and artists in operation at the time these rules and regulations are adopted shall make application for a permit and/or a license within six months of the adoption date. Failure to make application within six months of the rule's adoption will result in the existing establishment and/or artist's inability to be considered under the provisions of (k)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  The Peach County Health Authority may approve up to a 12 month period from the date of application for compliance of physical facilities of existing establishments; provided however that no exemptions will be granted for circumstances presenting an immediate threat to public health such as lack of potable water, toilet facilities, waste disposal, adequate lighting, adequate sinks and lavatories, and universal precautions. 
(3)  Body artists operating at the date of adoption of these rules must be certified in blood-borne pathogens/universal precautions, basic first aid/CPR certification, receive all vaccinations, and pass the Peach County Health Department exam within six months of the rule's adoption date. Failure to comply will result in the health authority's inability to permit the artist as existing personnel and all provisions of the "artist license section" will apply. 
(l)  Temporary body art facilities. 
(1)  A temporary facility permit may be issued for body art services provided outside of the physical site of a facility registered with the health authority for the purpose of product demonstration in connection with body art conventions or industry trade shows. 
(2)  A temporary body art establishment permit may be obtained by the operator of a body art establishment holding a current body art permit after submitting an application for a temporary facility. Such application must contain the location, the operating days, hours of operation of the temporary facility, and the plans/description of the temporary facility. 
(3)  Temporary facility permits will not be issued unless: 
a.  The applicant is a minimum of 18 years of age and demonstrates to the health authority his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and requirements of this body art regulation. 
b.  Application for a permit for the practitioner and/or temporary facility has been submitted for review by the health authority, at least 30 days prior to the event. 
c.  The applicant has paid all required fees set by the board of health. 
(4)  The following criteria pertain to temporary facilities permitting and licensing: 
a.  No permit and/or license for a temporary body art establishment may be issued for more than seven consecutive days. 
b.  An applicant for a temporary body art establishment permit and/or license shall not receive more than two consecutive seven day permits and/or license during a 30-day period. 
c.  Temporary facility permits and/or license shall not be transferable from one place to another or from one person to another. 
d.  Temporary facility permits and/or licenses shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous place as determined by the health authority so clients can readily observe them. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XXI, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-51. - Establishment permit. 
(a)  The Peach County Health Authority shall issue a body art establishment permit: 
(1)  After an inspection of the proposed facility reveals that the facility is in compliance with requirements of these rules, and 
(2)  Upon receiving a completed application with applicable fees. 
(b)  The permit shall be displayed as near the front entrance as practical or as determined by the Peach County Health Authority but in a conspicuous place that is easily visible to the public. The facility shall also post near the public entrance in conspicuous view [in the same area as the most current inspection report—within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an areas where it can be read at a distance of one foot away] the name, address and phone number of the Peach County Health Authority. 
(c)  The facility shall also post near the public entrance in conspicuous view (in the same area as the most current inspection report—within 15 feet of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an area where it can be read at a distance of one foot away) the name, address and phone number of the Peach County Health Department and the procedure for filing a complaint. 
(d)  Establishment permits automatically expire in one year, must be renewed unless revoked sooner by the health authority, and are not transferable from one studio to another. 
(e)  Responsibilities of the permit holder. Upon acceptance of the permit issued by the Peach County Health Authority, the permit holder in order to retain the permit shall: 
(1)  Comply with the provisions of this chapter including the conditions of a granted variance; 
(2)  Immediately discontinue operations and notify the Peach County Health Authority if an imminent health hazard may exist as defined under this rule; 
(3)  Allow representatives of the Peach County Health Authority access to the body art establishment as specified; 
(4)  Replace existing facilities and equipment with facilities and equipment that comply with this chapter if: 
a.  The Peach County Health Authority directs the replacement because the facilities and equipment constitute a public health hazard or nuisance or no longer comply with the criteria upon which the facilities and equipment were accepted, 
b.  The Peach County Health Authority directs the replacement of the facilities and equipment because of a change of ownership, or 
c.  The facilities and equipment are replaced in the normal course of operation; 
(5)  Comply with directives of the Peach County Health Authority including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives issued by the Peach County Health Authority in regard to the permit holder's body art establishment 
(6)  Accept notices issued and served by the Peach County Health Authority according to law; and 
(7)  Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal remedies authorized in law for failure to comply with this chapter or a directive of the health authority, including time frames for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other directives. 
(f)  Training/experience requirements: 
(1)  An existing body artist wanting to open a body art establishment must provide proof of experience with an approved apprenticeship [minimum of 2,400 hours documented within a 24 month period], proof of current licensing, blood-borne pathogen/universal precautions training, basic first aid/CPR, and successful completion of the health department exam. 
(2)  Reciprocity. For body artists from other states/districts/jurisdictions that do not have a permitting process wanting to open a body art establishment or become permitted for a temporary body art establishment, the following will be required: 
a.  Letter of experience (three years prior experience as documented by section 28-49(i) of this article). 
b.  Proof of successful completion of an OSHA approved blood-borne pathogen/universal precautions training program and basic first aid/CPR classes given or approved by the Peach County Health Department; and passage of the Peach County Health Department exam. 
(g)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the Peach County Health Authority when the studio ceases to operate, has moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(h)  One copy of the most current version of this body art regulation must be at the facility at all times. If not provided by the county health department, the health department must provide a location or website whereby a copy of the regulations may be obtained. 
(i)  A studio, which fails to comply with these rules and regulations, shall be subject to the sanctions available to the Peach County Health Authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-5 including but not limited to denial or revocation of its permit by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XXII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-52. - Inspections. 
(a)  The studio and all its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the Peach County Health Department. 
(b)  A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous, common area near the front entrance or as determined by the Peach County Health Authority (within 15 feet) of the front or primary public door and between five feet and seven feet from the floor and in an areas where it can be read at a distance of one foot away] and also shall be available for public inspection at the Peach County Health Department office wherein the studio is located if applicable. 
(c)  Representatives of the Peach County Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any body art facility or operation at any reasonable time as determined by the Peach County Health Authority for the purpose of making inspections and review of pertinent records to determine compliance with this chapter. Should access be denied, an inspection warrant may be obtained as authorized in O.C.G.A. § 31-5, Article 2. 
(d)  Body art facilities shall be subject to inspection at reasonable hours no less than twice annually and as often as is deemed necessary by the Peach County Health Authority to ensure adequate compliance with the provisions of these rules. The permit holder is responsible for providing a person or persons at the time of inspection who are authorized and able to provide access to all rooms, facilities and records of the body art facility and who can demonstrate that there is sufficient daily oversight of employees and routine monitoring of operations. 
(e)  If a person denies access to the Peach County Health Authority, the Health Authority shall: 
(1)  Inform the person that: 
a.  The permit holder is required to allow access to the Peach County Health Authority, 
b.  Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a body art establishment's permit to operate, and 
c.  If access is denied, an inspection warrant, issued by the appropriate authority to order access, may be obtained according to law; and 
(2)  Make a final request for access. 
(f)  Inspections may consist of the health officer/inspector accompanied by representatives of the nursing section of the Peach County Health Department. 
(g)  Health officers/inspectors must complete an OSHA approved blood-borne pathogens/ universal precautions, basic first aid/CPR, written exam, and field experience [five supervised inspections] prior to conducting solo inspections of permitted establishments. 
(h)  Inspection results—Reporting and scoring. 
(1)  Inspection results for body art establishments shall be recorded on standard Peach County Health Department forms. 
(2)  The scoring system shall include a weighted point value for each requirement in which critical items are assigned values of five points, with minor violations having assigned values of either one or two points. 
(3)  The rating score of the facilities shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations subtracted from 100. 
(i)  Violation correction. 
(1)  Correction of imminent health threats, critical and minor violations shall be corrected immediately, within 72 hours, and ten calendar days, respectively. 
(2)  Upon declaration of an imminent health hazard which cannot be immediately corrected, the Peach County Health Authority shall issue an order requiring the facility to immediately cease operations until authorized to reopen. 
(3)  Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the Peach County Health Authority may agree to or specify a longer time frame, not to exceed ten calendar days after the inspection, for the permit holder to correct violations. 
(4)  Failure to correct these violations to the satisfaction of the Peach County Health Authority/Department may result in such emergency action as deemed necessary by the Peach County Health Authority/Department including actions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2; § 31-5-9(a). 
(5)  In the case of temporary body art facilities, all critical violations shall be corrected immediately or provisions made to satisfy the violation until complete correction can be made within 24 hours. If critical violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease operations until authorized to resume by the Peach County Health Authority or its duly authorized representative. Upon declaration of an imminent health hazard which cannot be immediately corrected, the Peach County Health Authority shall issue an order requiring the facility to immediately cease operations until authorized to reopen. 
(6)  Follow up inspections when required will be performed within a 45 day period. 
(j)  Upon the completion of the inspection, the Peach County Health Authority shall have the person in charge sign the inspection report form. The person in charge's signature shall not necessarily indicate agreement with the findings noted on the inspection. 
(1)  The Peach County Health Authority shall: 
a.  Inform a person who declines to sign an acknowledgment of receipt of inspection findings that: 
1.  An acknowledgment of receipt is not an agreement with findings, 
2.  Refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt will not affect the permit holder's obligation to correct the violations noted in the inspection report within the time frames specified, and 
3.  A refusal to sign an acknowledgment of receipt is noted in the inspection report and conveyed to the Peach County Health Authority's historical record for the body art establishment; and 
b.  Make a final request that the person in charge sign an acknowledgment receipt of inspectional findings. 
(k)  Failure to make timely corrections to the satisfaction of the Peach County Health Authority/Department may subject the body art establishment to suspension or revocation of its permit pursuant to this rule. 
(1)  The Peach County Health Authority may approve a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits specified under [subsection] (h) of this subsection if a schedule of compliance is submitted by the permit holder and no health hazard exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule for compliance. 
(l)  Voluntary closure. A body art establishment that is graded with two critical violations or does not correct the violations within 72 hours (if allowed) of receiving inspection report will be requested to voluntarily close until all violations are corrected and/or have enforcement action taken to suspend or revoke the establishment's permit according to this rule. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XXIII, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-53. - Variance. 
(a)  Modifications and waivers. The Peach County Board of Health may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the requirements of this chapter if in the opinion of the Peach County Health Authority a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the variance and if it is determined that literal enforcement of such provision will result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. Variance request cannot be contrary to the public interest, public health and/or safety of the clients. 
(b)  Documentation of proposed variance and justification. Before a variance from a requirement of this chapter is considered, the information shall be provided in writing on forms provided by the Peach County Board of Health setting forth in detail the basis upon which the request is made by the person requesting the variance and will include: 
(1)  A statement of the proposed variance of the chapter requirement citing relevant rule and subsection numbers; 
(2)  An analysis of the rationale for how the potential public health hazards and nuisances addressed by the relevant rules and subsections will be alternatively addressed by the proposal; and 
(3)  All supporting documentation as it is relevant to the variance requested. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XXIV, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 28-54. - Implementation, enforcement, penalty. 
(a)  The administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 31-5. The Peach County Board of Health shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Implementation of these rules and regulations shall begin six months after the effective date. 
(b)  Peach County Board of Health shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of these rules and regulations within its jurisdiction and may include adoption as code by the governing Peach County for the purpose of enforcement. 
(c)  No body art studio shall operate without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. Ch. 40 of Tit. 31. Any person who fails or refuses to file including, but not limited to, an order to cease and desist operating a body art studio shall be subject to an injunction or other penalties from a court of jurisdiction. 
(d)  Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and body art procedures must cease immediately. 
(e)  Conditions warranting action. The Peach County Health Authority may summarily suspend a permit to operate a body art establishment if it determines through inspection, or examination of employees, records, or other means as specified in this chapter, that an imminent health hazard exists. 
(f)  Resumption of operations. If operations of a body art establishment are discontinued due to the existence of an imminent health hazard or otherwise according to law, the permit holder shall obtain approval from the health authority before resuming operations. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated under O.C.G.A. § 31-40 by the Peach County Health Authority shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(1), § XXV, 9-13-2016) 
Secs. 28-55—28-79. - Reserved. 
Article III. - Portable Sanitation Contractors 

Sec. 28-80. - Applicability. 
These rules shall apply to all portable sanitation service providers except those being used in a facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the department of natural resources under the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.01, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-81. - Definitions. 
Approval or approved means acceptable or accepted by the Peach County Health Department in accordance with applicable specifications stated herein or with additional criteria applied by the authority. 
Certified portable sanitation contractor means an individual engaged in furnishing, renting, or servicing portable units, and that has met the certification requirements of this chapter and is in good standing with the department. 
Certified portable sanitation company means a person engaged in the business of furnishing, renting or servicing portable sanitation units, and that has met the requirements of this chapter and is in good standing with the department. 
Construction site means a development area in which building construction, repair, or land improvement is taking place. 
Department or DPH means the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
Health Authority means a county board of health organized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-1 et seq. 
Holding tank means a water-tight container utilized temporarily to hold sewage from a portable sanitation unit. 
Onsite sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. It includes conventional septic tank systems and privies, as well as alternative onsite sewage management systems approved by the local health authority. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association including bodies political and corporate. 
Portable chemical toilet means a self-contained non-flush portable toilet facility containing a solution of water and chemical intended for the collection and temporary storage of human body wastes. 
Portable hand washing fixture means any portable fixture containing fresh water, soap and disposable towels used for cleaning an individual's hands. 
Portable sanitation contractor means an individual performing services related to installation, pumping, transportation, disposal, maintenance, removal, or safe management of portable sanitation units and portable hand washing fixtures. 
Portable sanitation unit means any portable structure or fixture used for the collection, temporary storage and chemical treatment of human body wastes that is not connected to an onsite sewage management system or public or community sewerage system. It includes portable chemical toilets and portable hand washing fixtures. 
Portable sanitation waste means sewage from portable sanitation units or other equipment designed for temporary collection and storage of waste containing human excreta or residuals of such, or other waste having similar characteristics, and the ingredients used as part of operation of the portable sanitation unit. It does not include liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank or similar treatment works that receives commercial wastewater, industrial wastewater or grease removed from a grease trap. 
Prohibited discharge means the discharge or spillage of sewage from a portable sanitation unit in violation of law and that constitutes a public health nuisance. 
Public health nuisance means any condition with the potential to cause or promote pathogens, infection, or disease in any individual or the public in general. 
Sanitary means free of conditions with the potential to cause or promote pathogens, infection, or disease in any individual or the public in general. 
Sewage means human excreta, all water-carried wastes, and liquid portable sanitation waste including grey water from portable showers and hand washing fixtures. 
Special event means any temporary activity attracting more than 50 persons and where individuals congregate to participate in or observe an activity in outdoor or portable enclosed or semi-enclosed structures for more than two consecutive hours. 
Toilet means a sanitary fixture meeting health authority and plumbing code requirements for receipt and conveyance of human body wastes to a public or community sewerage system or an onsite sewage management system. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.02, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  The department shall regulate the use of temporary non-flush portable sanitation units, and shall regulate persons engaged in the business of furnishing, renting, or servicing portable chemical toilets, and portable hand washing facilities at locations where public sewage treatment systems or on-site sewage management systems are not available or lack sufficient quantities. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of a portable sanitation unit without having obtained a "waste removal and disposal permit" from the Peach County Health Department for the county in which the business is based. The permit must be renewed annually, and shall be valid in every county throughout the state. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the certified portable sanitation contractor and certified portable sanitation company to maintain the portable sanitation unit in a safe and sanitary manner so as not to constitute a public health nuisance. 
(d)  The property owner and special event sponsor are responsible for all prohibited discharge and unapproved spillage of sewage associated with a portable sanitation unit. A portable restroom or portable hand wash fixture cannot be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage, dumping or discharge of sewage from such system to the ground surface, to a water course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater or other body of water. The property owner and special event sponsor must notify the portable sanitation company if any unit becomes unsanitary, unsafe, or causes a prohibited discharge. The property owner, as the originator, is responsible for ensuring that the portable sanitation unit is only used for the disposal of human excreta. Commercial waste, grease, hazardous chemicals, and non-human excreta shall not be discarded into portable sanitation units. 
(e)  Each special event sponsor and construction site owner utilizing a portable sanitation unit must and show proof of a service contract with a certified portable sanitation company. 
(f)  Portable sanitation unit must meet the requirements of this chapter where sanitary facilities are needed on a temporary basis for construction sites and special events. 
(g)  Employees at all construction sites and the general public attending and participating in special events that are inadequately served by sewered toilet facilities should have easy access to portable sanitation units that are maintained in a clean, sanitary, and functional condition for the protection of human health, safety and welfare. Where a portable sanitation unit supplements or serves in lieu of sewered toilet facilities, the portable sanitation units shall meet the following guidelines: 
(1)  Must be furnished by a certified portable sanitation contractor or company holding a current "waste removal and disposal permit" issued by the Peach County Health Department. 
(2)  The minimum number of portable sanitation units required during anticipated peak attendance at a construction site shall be determined in accordance with the most current Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations for toilets at construction sites (appendix Table 1), after taking into consideration any sewered seated or urinal toilets that may be present at the site of the construction site. 
(3)  The minimum number of portable sanitation units required during anticipated peak attendance at a special event shall be determined in accordance with Table 2, after taking into consideration any sewered seated or urinal toilets that may be present at the site of the special event. 
(h)  Portable sanitation units shall be located as close as practical to the highest concentration of participants, observers and employees of special events. However, the units should be placed as far from the food service area as possible. The safety of users shall be a primary consideration in the placement of the units. At special events, portable sanitation units shall be accessible at all times for maintenance by truck. 
(i)  No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of a portable sanitation unit. Chemicals used in the cleaning, operation or maintenance of portable sanitation units shall be in accordance with applicable federal, state and local provisions. 
(j)  The fresh water tank on the service vehicle must be filled with potable water only. When hand wash fixtures are serviced, they must be filled with water from the fresh water tank on the truck or directly from a potable water source. All fresh water tanks on the service vehicles and affixed to hand wash fixtures must be labeled with the international symbol for "do not drink". Each hand washing fixture must be sufficiently supplied with soap and paper towels adequate for the duration between servicing. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.03, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-83. - Construction of portable sanitation units. 
(a)  A portable sanitation unit shall be a portable self-contained sheltered unit equipped with a waste-receiving holding tank. The waste container shall be rigid, water-tight, made from impervious material, and capable of containing the waste in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Portable sanitation units shall be constructed in the following prescribed manner: 
(1)  Each portable sanitation unit must have the name and phone number of the company clearly visible. 
(2)  Rooms or shelters housing the units shall be of solid construction, easy to clean, and provide privacy. The toilet room shall be ventilated to the outside and adequately lighted. All ventilation openings to the units, except vent pipes, shall be covered with a screen. 
(3)  Portable sanitation units shall have closing doors with internal latches provided to prevent inadvertent entry. 
(c)  Portable sanitation units having hand wash fixtures shall have an air gap between the water supply faucet and the flood level rim of the fixture sufficient to prevent backflow and cross contamination between the fresh water supply tank and the wastewater holding tank. 
(d)  Any defective or inadequate portable sanitation unit shall be repaired, replaced or withdrawn from service by locking or removal. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.04, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-84. - Removal and disposal of waste from portable sanitation units. 
(a)  Removal and disposal of waste from portable sanitation units shall be conducted only by a certified portable sanitation contractor in good standing with the department, pursuant to a "waste removal and disposal permit." 
(b)  The application for a "waste removal and disposal permit" shall be submitted in writing, on forms provided by the department, to the Peach County Health Department for the county in which the business is based, at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The Peach County Health Department shall approve or disapprove the application within 20 days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal, and such other documentation as required by the Peach County Health Department, including evidence that waste removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide evidence of satisfactory compliance with the provisions of these rules. 
(c)  The permit shall be valid for no more than 12 months, and shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations. Permits shall expire upon change in company ownership or business location. 
(d)  Removal of portable sanitation waste shall be conducted in a clean and sanitary manner by means of a vacuum hose to a leak proof tank truck on which all ports are properly valved and capped. The certified portable sanitation contractor is required to clean up all spillage during unit servicing. 
(1)  Service vehicles should be equipped with a portable sanitation waste tank adequately sized to service the units; a tank containing water for recharging the units; and when applicable or required, a fresh water tank filled with potable water to service the hand washing fixtures. 
(2)  Separate dedicated hoses shall be used for supplying potable water and servicing the portable sanitation unit. They shall be labeled or sized to prevent them from being interchanged and stored in such a manner to prevent cross contamination. 
(e)  It is the responsibility of property owners, employers, and event sponsors to ensure that portable sanitation units are serviced by a certified portable sanitation contractor or company in accordance with this rule at least once every seven days, and more frequently as usage may require. 
(f)  Servicing shall include the use of a sanitizing solution for cleaning urinals and toilet seats, removing waste from containers, recharging containers with an odor controlling solution, and installing an adequate supply of toilet tissue. 
(g)  Portable sanitation waste from tank trucks must be disposed at a facility regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(h)  A manifest or route sheet must be maintained by the portable sanitation company for a period of 12 months. The manifest or route sheet must include: 
(1)  Name or originator, event, sponsor; 
(2)  Address or route; 
(3)  Date and location of service; 
(4)  Date and location of final disposal; and 
(5)  Total of gallons being disposed. 
(i)  The county issued "waste removal and disposal permit" number, including the name of the person or firm engaging in the removal of portable sanitation unit waste, shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(j)  Every vehicle used for service and removal of portable sanitation unit waste shall be equipped with watertight tanks or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained as to prevent leakage. The truck must also have adequate means to clean each unit in place with sanitizing solution. 
(k)  Signage or placard stating "do not drink" shall be affixed to the fresh water supply tank and all portable hand washing fixtures. The fresh water supply tank, hand wash fixture's water supply tank and gray water storage tank must be cleaned with one to ten bleach to water solution (typically three to six percent sodium hypochlorite solution) or equivalent at least every 45 days to prohibit the growth of algae. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.05, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-85. - Certification of portable sanitation contractors and companies. 
(a)  The department shall be responsible for certifying individuals and companies performing services related to furnishing, renting, servicing, and maintenance of a portable sanitation unit. 
(b)  There shall be established an advisory committee to assist the department with certification, recertification and decertification of all individuals required to be certified under section 28-85. The committee shall include at least two individuals that are currently certified as portable sanitation contractors. The advisory committee will assist the department with the following: 
(1)  Establishing written tests to be administered for the various certifications, and revising such tests from time to time; 
(2)  Reviewing complaints regarding poor quality of work and unlawful or unethical practices, and recommending appropriate action by the department; 
(3)  Reviewing the content of educational programs and events and assigning appropriate continuing education units; 
(4)  Reviewing the established criteria for certification in the assigned specialties and recommending such modifications as are appropriate for the ongoing management of the process; and 
(5)  Providing such services or advice as will assist the Peach County Health Department in the effective enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Certification of portable sanitation contractors: 
(1)  Individuals engaged in the cleaning installation and maintenance of portable sanitation units may obtain certification from the department as a portable sanitation contractor meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must be at least 18 years of age; 
b.  Must show proof of ownership or employment with a certified portable sanitation company currently operating in good standing with the department; and 
c.  Must successfully complete a written or oral examination concerning properly maintaining a portable sanitation unit in a clean, sanitary, and functional condition for the protection of human health, safety and welfare. Individuals currently certified by the Portable Sanitation Association International as a health and safety certified portable sanitation worker are excluded from the examination requirement in this chapter. However, all other requirements must be completed prior to receiving a certified portable sanitation contractor certificate. 
d.  The certification period is two years. 
(2)  Certification may be renewed for a portable sanitation contractor upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary actions related to the portable sanitation industry; 
b.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company. 
c.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this chapter during the certification period; 
(3)  A portable sanitation contractor whose certification has expired may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to the portable sanitation industry. 
b.  Must not have committed any illegal service or maintenance acts related to this chapter following the expiration of the certification. 
c.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company; and 
d.  If more than two years have passed since the certification expired, the applicant must take and pass the portable sanitation contractor exam in addition to meeting the continuing education requirement. 
(4)  A decertified portable sanitation contractor may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must wait at least two years after decertification to re-apply: 
b.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary actions; 
c.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this chapter during the decertification period; 
d.  Must submit a copy of business license or other verification of business or submit proof of employment with a certified portable sanitation company; and 
e.  Must take and pass the portable sanitation contractor exam with a score of 70 or above. 
(d)  Certification of portable sanitation companies. 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of cleaning, pumping, installation, and maintenance of portable sanitation units may be certified as a portable sanitation company by the department upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must employ at least one person who is a certified portable sanitation contractor in good standing with the department: 
b.  May not associate with any person as owner, part owner, manager, or employee, whose certification has been revoked under this section 28-85, unless and until such person has been recertified; and 
c.  The certification period is two years. 
(2)  Certification may be renewed for a portable sanitation company upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to this chapter; 
b.  Owner or designee must obtain at least six hours of continuing education approved by the department; and 
c.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this chapter during the certification period. 
(3)  A portable sanitation company whose certification has expired may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action related to this chapter; 
b.  Must submit evidence of the owner's or their designee's completion of six hours of continuing education as approved by the department; 
c.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this chapter during the expiration period. 
(4)  A decertified portable sanitation company may be recertified upon meeting the following requirements: 
a.  Must wait at least two years after decertification to re-apply; 
b.  Must have no unresolved or outstanding disciplinary action relating to this chapter; and 
c.  Must not have committed any illegal acts related to this chapter during the decertification period; 
(e)  Fees. 
(1)  The certification examination fee is $50.00. 
(2)  The portable sanitation company fee shall be $300.00 for the two year certification period. Persons who achieve a passing score on the examination will be issued a numbered certificate upon receipt of the certification fee. 
(3)  The renewal fee shall be $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.06, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Sec. 28-86. - Decertification of portable sanitation contractors and companies. 
(a)  The department may take disciplinary action, including suspension and revocation of the certification if the department finds that the contractor or company has failed to comply or maintain compliance with O.C.G.A. Tit. 31 or this section 28-86, or has committed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Misrepresentation or falsification of information on any application or document submitted to the Peach County Department or any health authority; or 
(2)  Conviction in any court of a felony or crime of moral turpitude. In the case of a corporation or other business entity, this provision shall apply in the event of such a conviction of any person associated with the company as an owner, partner, officer, director, or manager. 
(b)  The holder of any certification that is revoked under this rule shall not be eligible for recertification for a period of at least 24 months. In the case of a portable sanitation company, this provision also shall apply to partners, co-owners, officers, directors, and stockholders of corporate providers involved in the company. 
(Ord. No. 09-13-2016(2), § 511-3-36-.07, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Appendix 
Table 1 :  Minimum Number of Portable Sanitation Units at Construction Sites 

 
29 CFR 1926.51 OSHA Regulations for Toilets at Construction Sites 
* The number of portable sanitation units required shall be determined by the maximum number of workers present on a regular 8 hour shift. Shifts lasting longer than 8 hours (40 hour work week) should double the number of portable sanitation units. 
** "Servicing" refers to the emptying of waste and the cleaning of the portable sanitation unit. 
Table 2 :  Portable Sanitation Units for Special Events Planning 

 
Based on "Portable Restroom Requirements at Special Events and Crowd Gatherings" Center for Business and Industrial Studies, University of Missouri-St. Louis 
• Determine the appropriate potable sanitation units needed form the table above. 
• For each sewered toilet available onsite, subtract 1 from the previously calculated number. 
• If alcoholic beverages are to be served, add 25% to the base number. 
• For peak crowd numbers that fall between chart numbers, round up to the next base number. 
• Units shall be provided in accordance with the Georgia Accessibility Code following state or local requirements. 
• Table based on units being serviced daily 
State Law reference— Authority: O.C.G.A. § 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Chapter 29 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police power, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(1); peace officer memorial day, police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-11-6; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; special policemen, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1; torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 29-1—29-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— County may employ marshals to perform duties of constables, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-100(c)(1). 

Sec. 29-31. - Office created; law enforcement unit of state. 
(a)  There is created the office of county marshal for the county. 
(b)  The county marshal's office shall do all things necessary to be recognized as a law enforcement unit of the state and certified under the standards of the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(1), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 29-32. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The county marshal's office shall have full powers of arrest in the enforcement of all county ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(b)  The primary duties and responsibilities of the office of county marshal are to: 
(1)  Enforce all ordinances enacted by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(2)  Issue warnings and citations for court appearances for the violation of county ordinances. 
(3)  Investigate and collect evidence of these ordinance violations. 
(4)  Respond to complaints of alleged ordinance violations. 
(5)  Appear and testify in court. 
(6)  Do any follow-up work that may be necessary. 
(7)  Ensure proper collection of fines. 
(8)  Work in conjunction with the building official/zoning administrator. 
(9)  Coordinate enforcement efforts with the Peach County/Fort Valley building and zoning department, the county public works department and any other county department or division as may be necessary. 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(1), §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 29-33. - Chief marshal. 
There shall be a chief marshal appointed by the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners. The chief marshal shall be responsible for developing office policy and organization and for the appointment of such deputy marshals as may be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(1), § 7) 
Sec. 29-34. - Requirements for officers. 
All officers of the county marshal's office shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All officers of the county marshal's office shall be certified pursuant to the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. or certified within a 12-month period after employment. 
(2)  All officers shall be experienced in the issuance of citations and warnings, and court appearances may be required as a condition of employment. 
(3)  All officers must be at least 19 years of age, have a high school diploma or GED and a valid Georgia driver's license. 
(4)  All officers must have a clean criminal history. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(1), § 5) 
Sec. 29-35. - Jurisdiction. 
The office of county marshal shall be within the operational jurisdiction of the office of the county administrator, under the direct supervision of the building official/zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 10-18-94(1), § 6) 
Chapter 30 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14, § 14-1; dangerous and unfit buildings or structures, § 26-36 et seq.; planning, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 46; vegetation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS; STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-12-2010, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 30-26—30-34, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to permits and derived from Res. of 12-20-71. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of Peach County. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the county building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by subsection 30-28(1)a. and b. of this article reasonably portray or represent the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the county. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of Peach County, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-27. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-28. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. All permits shall be issued within 30 days of receipt of all items listed in subsections (1)a.—d. of this section. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of section 30-29 of this article; 
c.  A $150.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $150.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(4)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the county to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow up inspection and will be based upon the assessed value of the home. 
(5)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-29. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home locate din the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act; 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-30. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed, except that nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the location of manufactured homes in areas where they are not authorized by applicable zoning and land use regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-31. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article be rendered invalid by a court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Sec. 30-32. - Effectivity. 
This article shall become effective on October 12, 2010. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010) 
Chapter 34 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-1—34-10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROADS STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 5-14-2013, §§ 1—7, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Div. 2, §§ 34-11—34-17, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 34-11. - Title. 
This division shall be entitled "Peach County Roads Standards." Contained herein are the minimum standards believed necessary by the Peach County Board of Commissioners to assure the construction of public roads are designed and constructed in accordance with acceptable engineering standards and that a healthy and safe environment is created in Peach County. Also contained herein is a list of unpaved roads (Exhibit No. 1) that Peach County presently maintains and will continue to maintain. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 34-12. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide uniform criteria and standards to be followed in the construction of public roads within Peach County, and to identify those unpaved roads now maintained by Peach County. The standards contained herein are not intended to replace or be a substitute for knowledge, experience, or judgment, but are to be considered minimum engineering and construction standards necessary for the construction of public roads. The Peach County Board of Commissioners will not accept roads constructed to lesser standards, but may, upon evidence of special circumstances, grant variances to these standards if the health, safety, and welfare of the public will not be endangered by such variances. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 2) 
Sec. 34-13. - County road development. 
New roads are added to the Peach County road system by resolution passed by the Peach County Board of Commissioners. Sources of the roads are: additions, realignments, relinquished state or federal highways, or other development. Normally, before a new road becomes part of the Peach County road system, it passes through six steps: planning, design, right-of-way acquisition or dedication, construction, inspection, and acceptance. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 3) 
Sec. 34-14. - Design criteria. 
Plans and specifications are to be prepared based on appropriate planning and applicable planning criteria standards and requirements. All road design not associated with subdivision designs shall be designed in accordance with requirements of articles "XIV Design Standards" and "XV Required Subdivision Improvements" of the Peach County Comprehensive Land Development Resolution, and plans of such roads prepared by a licensed Georgia professional engineer. Subdivision roads shall be designed in accordance with the Peach County Comprehensive Land Development Resolution. Any road construction requiring [a] disturbed area of one acre or more or the addition of 5,000 square feet of impervious area must meet the requirements of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Peach County Stormwater Design Manual, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission erosion control requirements, and approval of erosion, pollution, and sediment control plans, and Georgia NPDES permit requirements. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 4) 
Sec. 34-15. - Construction criteria. 
All construction shall conform to the minimum requirements detailed in articles "XIV Design Standards" and "XV Required Subdivision Improvements" of the Peach County Comprehensive Land Development Resolution. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 5) 
Sec. 34-16. - Administration. 
(a)  All road plans are to be completed in sufficient detail to facilitate review and are to be submitted to the county/Peach County Board of Commissioners or the board's designee for review and approval. Approval of plans shall remain in effect for one year. However, after one year, if the project is not substantially complete, the owner must submit a request for an extension and modify the existing plan to meet any changes in requirements as set forth in the Code, and resubmit the plan to the county/Peach County Board of Commissioners or the board's designee for review and approval. 
(b)  During the construction, the public works director shall from time to time make field inspections. After completion of all the construction and installation of the required public improvements, and if the said work has met the specifications as described herein as determined by the public works director, [the] Peach County Board of Commissioners shall notify the owner in writing of the approval of said work. 
(c)  The owner shall petition the board of commissioners to officially accept the completed work on the construction and installation of required public improvements not less than one year from the date of the written approval by the county. It is the owner's responsibility to have all plats and deeds required for acceptance and dedication produced and recorded in the Peach County Superior Court. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall require the Peach County Board of Commissioners to accept as a public road any private improved or paved road even though such improvement may conform with the standards contained in the Peach County Comprehensive Land Development Resolution. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 6) 
Sec. 34-17. - Existing unpaved roads. 
The list of roads listed in Exhibit 1 are unpaved public roads presently maintained by Peach County. Peach County will continue to maintain these unpaved roads within the lengths and widths maintained at the date of the passage of this resolution [May 14, 2013] as listed in Exhibit 1. 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, § 7) 
EXHIBIT NO. 1 
Peach County 2013  Unpaved Roads 

 
(Res. of 5-14-2013, Exh. 1) 
Secs. 34-18—34-25. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Middle Georgia Regional Solid Waste Management Authority, § 2-76 et seq.; flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, § 14-46 et seq.; junkyards and salvage operations, § 18-81 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; nuisances, § 26-26 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 26-71 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - County landfill tipping fees. 
The county landfill tipping fees shall be determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the office of the clerk of the county commission. 
Secs. 38-2—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household garbage means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste, material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shore or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Ord. of 7-14-87, §§ I, IV.b.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-27. - Dumping; depositing litter on public or private property or waters; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the county as the county dump for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the county to use such property. 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed for such purpose. 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which a conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which a conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-14-87, § II) 
Sec. 38-28. - Prima facie evidence of violation; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on any public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 7-14-87, § III) 
Sec. 38-29. - Provision of receptacles; notice to public; violation. 
(a)  County to provide. The county shall establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations. 
(b)  Designation of containers for household garbage; misuse or vandalization of container. The county may designate any or all such receptacles as being suitable for the dumping therein of household garbage only. If a receptacle is clearly marked "household garbage only," it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the receptacle other than household garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any receptacles provided for the dumping of trash, garbage or litter. 
(c)  Violation. Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 7-14-87, § IV.a, b.2—4) 
Sec. 38-30. - Dumping from other counties; violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any litter into the county from another county and dump or deposit such litter on any public property, including receptacles, or private property without the permission of the owner. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 7-14-87, § V) 
Secs. 38-31—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Except as otherwise specified in this article, any term or word used in this article shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq. 
Land application unit means an operation by which waste is spread on the surface of the ground or mixed into the topsoil and results in raising the fertility of the soil. 
Toxic waste means any waste containing any substance which would be poisonous to an ordinary, healthy person who consumed or touched such substance. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § I.B) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-52. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the health, safety and welfare not only of the citizens of the county but of all others who may drink the water, breathe the air or consume the produce thereof, by minimizing pollution and encouraging the recycling and reuse of materials that would otherwise be disposed of as waste. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § I.A) 
Sec. 38-53. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to regulate any waste disposal which may occur in the county, and no such disposal shall occur except in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § VII) 
Sec. 38-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the request of the county, § 38-54 has been repealed. Formerly, said section pertained to permits and fees as related to waste handling or disposal facility and is derived from Ord. of 4-12-94, § I.C. The user is directed to § 38-61 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 38-55. - Compliance and penalties. 
(a)  The owner or the chief official of any firm, corporation or other body operating any waste handling or disposal facility shall, at least once every quarter, personally appear before the clerk of the superior court of the county and certify under oath that the facility is being operated in compliance with this article and with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  Failure to comply with this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  The provisions of this article may be enforced by any legal or equitable action, including injunction, by the county attorney. 
(d)  Three or more violations of this article shall be grounds for revoking a permit after notice and hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § I.D) 
Sec. 38-56. - Municipal waste. 
(a)  Definition. The term "municipal waste" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, except that such term shall not include any waste containing industrial waste, as that term is defined in section 38-57, or any hazardous or toxic waste. Municipal waste shall include sewer sludge in any state, whether wet, dry or composted. 
(b)  Disposal options. 
(1)  Municipal waste may be disposed of in solid waste landfills. 
(2)  Municipal waste may be disposed of by incineration, but only in areas zoned industrial general or, when established as accessory to an existing use, in a general commercial district. 
(3)  Municipal waste in the form of sewer sludge may be disposed of in a land application unit. If such sludge has been composted, a buffer of 250 feet shall be maintained. If such sludge has not been composted, a buffer of 2,500 feet shall be maintained. 
(4)  Any other disposal of municipal waste shall be subject to review and approval by a qualified, independent engineer to be selected by the county and whose approval shall be based on the purpose of this article. 
(c)  Permit, fees, etc. No permit, fees or certificate of compliance shall be required of any incorporated municipality located within the boundaries of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § II) 
Sec. 38-57. - Industrial waste. 
(a)  Definition. The term "industrial waste" shall include any type of waste, whether liquid or solid, produced by or resulting from any manufacturing or industrial process. Any mixture of wastes generated from different sources and containing industrial wastes shall be deemed to be industrial wastes for the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Disposal options. 
(1)  Industrial wastes may be disposed of in solid waste landfills located in areas zoned industrial general, provided that industrial wastes containing toxic waste shall be deposited in leakproof containers of sufficient strength to withstand puncture or breakage under the circumstances of disposal. 
(2)  Industrial wastes may be incinerated in areas zoned industrial general, provided that no emission of toxic waste occurs. 
(3)  Industrial wastes may not be disposed of in land application units. 
(4)  Any other disposal of industrial waste shall be subject to review and approval by a qualified, independent engineer to be selected by the county and whose approval shall be based on the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § III) 
Sec. 38-58. - Agricultural waste. 
(a)  Definition. The term "agricultural waste" shall include animal (except human) waste and crop waste. Agricultural waste shall not include pesticides, herbicides or other chemical-type products except in the residual amounts occurring in normal agricultural operations. 
(b)  Disposal options. 
(1)  Agricultural waste may be disposed of in solid waste landfills. 
(2)  Agricultural wastes may be incinerated. Crop residues may be subjected to open burning with the approval of the state forestry commission. 
(3)  Agricultural waste may be disposed of in land application units in areas zoned agricultural residential (R-Ag) or residential agricultural (R1-Ag) provided that in R1-Ag areas a 500-foot buffer shall be maintained; and there shall be no stockpiling of any animal waste in an R1-Ag area. No dead animals or parts thereof shall be deposited of in land application units. 
(4)  Any other disposal of agricultural waste shall be subject to review and approval by a qualified, independent engineer to be selected by the county and whose approval shall be based on the purposes of this article. 
(5)  No permit or certificate of compliance shall be required to dispose of agricultural waste by land application. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § IV) 
Sec. 38-59. - Intrastate waste. 
Waste generated exclusively in any other county or city within the state shall be disposed of in the county only in accordance with a regional waste management plan consented to by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § V) 
Sec. 38-60. - Public facilities. 
(a)  County landfill. Any facility owned by the county shall be used exclusively for the handling and disposal of wastes generated in the county except as otherwise permitted by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  County roads. The issuance or renewal of a permit for a facility which is or may be accessed by a county road may be conditioned on: 
(1)  Restrictions as to the size, weight, load capacity, routing and hours of operation of any vehicle transporting waste to such facility; and 
(2)  Improvement of any county road serving such facility such that the operation of vehicles transporting waste to the facility will not result in higher road maintenance costs for the county, with the cost of such improvement to be paid by the applicant or permit holder. 
(Ord. of 4-12-94, § VI) 
Sec. 38-61. - Privately owned landfills; waste disposal areas; and waste storage areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a privately owned landfill, waste disposal area or waste storage area intended to be used by the owner or used by others for the disposal or storage of waste without first having obtained from the board of commissioners a permit for the same. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the board of commissioners until the applicant has shown, to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners, that all federal, state, and county laws, regulations, and ordinances will be complied with in the operation and management of the landfill, waste disposal area or waste storage area. 
(c)  In determining whether to issue such permit the board of commissioners should first determine whether satisfactory provision has been made for each of the following factors: 
(1)  Adequacy of the size of the site for the use contemplated and whether or not adequate land area is available for the proposed use including provision of all required yards, open space, off street parking, and all other applicable requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located; 
(2)  Compatibility of the proposed use with adjacent properties and land uses and with the other properties and land uses in the district; 
(3)  Adequacy of public services, public facilities, and utilities to serve the use contemplated; 
(4)  Adequacy of the public street on which the use is proposed to be located and whether or not there is sufficient traffic-carrying capacity for the use proposed so as not to unduly increase traffic and create congestion in the area; 
(5)  Whether or not existing land uses located along access routes to the site will be adversely affected by the character of the vehicles or the volume of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
(6)  Ingress and egress to the subject property and to all proposed buildings, structures, and the uses thereon, with particular reference to pedestrian and automotive safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in the event of fire or other emergency; 
(7)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration generated by the proposed use; 
(8)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the hours of operation of the proposed use; 
(9)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation of the proposed use; 
(10)  Whether or not the proposed plan is otherwise consistent with the requirements of the zoning district classification in which the use is proposed to be located; 
(11)  Whether or not the proposed use is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive land use plan; 
(12)  Whether or not the proposed plan provides for all required buffer zones and transitional buffer zones where required by the regulations of the district in which the proposed use is to be located; 
(13)  Whether or not there is adequate provision of refuse and service areas; 
(14)  Whether the proposed plan will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaelogical resources. 
(d)  In addition the board of commissioners shall also consider each of the following factors in determining whether or not a permit should be issued: 
(1)  Whether a showing has been made that the proposed use does not pose any potential negative impact resulting from air pollution, degradation of the soil and/or water quality, noise odor, or other negative environmental effects; 
(2)  Whether or not a showing has been made that the proposed use will not have a deleterious effect on use of land and value of existing housing in adjacent and nearby neighborhoods; 
(3)  Whether or not a showing has been made that the proposed use will not create a negative traffic impact on any adjacent or nearby residential street(s) resulting from truck and other vehicular traffic associated with the facility; and 
(4)  Whether or not a showing has been made that the proposed use represent an overconcentration of such uses in the area. 
(e)  Any person or entity operating a private landfill site of any kind shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  No private landfill facility shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of the nearest residence, the distance herein shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the property on which the landfill is located. 
(2)  Traffic routes, entrances, and exits to the facility shall be approved by the county director of public works; 
(3)  All facilities shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the landfill is in use, and the landfill must be barricaded when closed to public; 
(4)  All facilities shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet in height, consisting of a wire, not more than a two inch mesh, or some other similar fencing material or device approved in writing by the county zoning enforcement officer; 
(5)  Any changes to the normal drainage of the property upon which the facility is located shall be accommodated by storm sewers or other appropriate drainage structures as necessary to properly care for drainage. These storm water structures shall be approved by the county engineer prior to their installation and shall be installed at the expense of the owner and/or operator. Design of these structures shall be by a registered professional engineer; 
(6)  A state permit, county business license, and written permit for operation from the board of commissioners as provided herein shall be required before any landfill operation begins; 
(7)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner and operator of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health; 
(8)  Access to a privately owned landfill located on property fronting on a road which is part of the county road maintenance system shall be approved by the county director of public works and the board of commissioners; 
(9)  The road accessing a privately owned landfill located on property fronting on a road which is part of the county road maintenance system will meet county road construction standards to support the trucks and vehicular traffic accessing the facility. The county will not maintain said access road, and the owner and operator of said landfill shall sign an affidavit and agreement to maintain all portions of said road to meet the such standards as determined by the county director of public works and the board of commissioners; 
(10)  Access to a privately owned landfill shall be limited to authorized entrances, which shall be closed when the site is not in operation; 
(11)  Proper zoning approval shall be obtained for all proposed privately owned landfill sites; 
(12)  The applicant for a permit to operate a privately owned landfill, waste disposal facility or waste storage facility shall pay a $250.00 fee with each application for a permit to use property as a privately owned landfill, waste disposal facility, or waste storage facility, said fee to be used to defray the cost of processing the application. An additional $250.00 fee per year for renewal of the permit will be required. Permit renewal of permit approval is at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners of Peach County; 
(13)  In addition to the Hazardous Waste Trust Fund fee provided by Georgia Law, O.C.G.A § 12-8-20 et seq., and the $1.00 surcharge provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39 the owner and/or operator of a privately owned landfill shall pay to Peach County a reasonable host fee as may be determined by the Board of Commissioners of Peach County for all assessable deposits placed in the landfill. The payments provided for therein are separate from and in addition to any surcharge payable to the county pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39(d); 
(14)  The owner and/or operator of a privately owned landfill shall provide the county copies of all filings required by the Environmental Protective Division ("EPD") or its successors concerning the volume or amount of deposits to the landfill. Additionally the owner and/or operator of a privately owned landfill will provide the county, within 30 days after the last day of each month, specific information concerning the cubic yards received by the landfill which are subject to the host fee for that preceding month and the origin of the waste received for previous month. The county or its designated auditors shall have the right on a yearly basis and upon reasonable written notice to the owner and/or operator of a private landfill to audit the volume or tonnage reports prepared by the owner and/or operator of the landfill and submitted to the State of Georgia in connection with the use and operation of the landfill; 
(15)  The county through its designated representatives shall have the right to enter a private disposal site or private landfill site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this section and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. The inspections shall in no way constitute approval of the operation therein, and shall not relieve or release the owner or operator of the liability for operating the facility in accordance with applicable county, state or federal regulations; 
(16)  In addition to other remedies, if the county shall determine that the facility is being operated in violation of provisions of this section, and the violations are not corrected in a reasonable time thereof, the county may order the facility closed or its operation suspended. In default of compliance with such order, the county may seek an injunction to restrain further operations either on a permanent basis or until violations of this section are corrected; 
(17)  Operating hours of privately owned landfills shall be restricted as follows: 
(1.)  Deposits may be received from 7:00 am to 6:00 pm Monday through Friday; 
(2.)  All motors, machinery and equipment, other than as required for safety purposes, as required to comply with permit conditions or for emergency or maintenance requirements, shall be shut down at 10:00 pm, Monday through Friday; 
(3.)  The landfill may be open for business on Saturdays from 7:00 am to 4:00 pm. All deposits made to the landfill on Saturday must be completed by 5:00 pm; 
(4.)  All motors, machinery and equipment, other than as required for safety purposes, as required to comply with permit conditions or for emergency or maintenance requirements, shall be shut down at 5:00 pm on Saturday; 
(5.)  The landfill shall not be open for business on Sunday, but emergency repairs and/or maintenance shall be permitted; 
(6.)  No public access to the landfill will be permitted on Sunday. 
(18)  The owner and/or operator of a privately owned landfill shall maintain a buffer zone no less than 500 feet wide of trees or other natural vegetation around the outer perimeter of the property on which the landfill facility is located. 
(f)  Applicants for permits and renewals of permits shall provide the Board of Commissioners of Peach County with the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  The type of waste for which the facility will be operated; 
(3)  The type of facility proposed; 
(4)  The location of the proposed facility, a legal description of the property where the proposed facility is to be located, and the current owner of the property; 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, its state of incorporation, date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of its officers, directors, and registered agent for service of process in the state; 
(6)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners; 
(7)  A sworn statement by the applicant stating that neither the applicant, nor any of its officers, directors or general partners have been convicted of a felony of any kind or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past ten years; 
(8)  Any other such information as may be requested by the board of commissioners that may be relevant to the issuance, renewal, or denial of a permit; 
(9)  Giving of false information with any application for a permit or renewal thereof shall be grounds for denial of a permit or termination of any permit that may have been issued after receipt of such false information and the county may order operations to cease and terminate. 
( Ord. of 1-14-03) 
Secs. 38-62—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE, SCRAP TIRE AND TRASH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Ordinance of April 11, 2000, §§ 1—11, was not specifically amendatory of the Code, hence; inclusion as §§ 38-81—38-91 was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 38-81. - Definitions. 
Litter shall mean all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined herein. 
Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or water course; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-62), or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of animal bi-products, "Waste" includes without limitation, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, discarded mobile homes and discarded manufactured housing, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, construction, mining or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction, and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste which is nonhazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by The Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Scrap tires means all tires which are no longer suitable for their original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. See O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-22 (31) 
Scrap tire generator shall mean any person who generates scrap tires as defined in Section 391-3-3-.19 (2.1) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Scrap tire carrier shall mean any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under Section 391-3-4-.19 (5.G) for the purpose of removal to scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22 (32) 
Tire retailer shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22 (39) 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 1) 
Sec. 38-82. - Waste disposal; general. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires, and refuse on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter, waste or scrap tires at any place in this county, including, without limitation, any public or private property in this county or any waters in this county unless such litter or waste originates in this county, and; 
(1)  The property is designated and permitted by the State of Georgia and/or the Peach County Board of Commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and waste, and the person is authorized to use such property, and; 
(2)  The litter or waste is place into a receptacle or container installed on such property; however, any litter or waste placed into such a receptacle or container installed on such property must not be allowed to accumulate for an unreasonable period of time, and in no event shall it be allowed to accumulate to the point of overflowing the container or receptacle or to a point where the container or receptacle may not be closed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any public highways, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)  In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, or stream or creek, or; 
(3)  In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state, or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(d)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, tire retailers, shall be subject to rules as defined in Section 391-3-4-.19 of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management, and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-2 et.seq. and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4- applicable to solid waste. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 2) 
Sec. 38-83. - Transporting litter and waste. 
(a)  It shall he unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in Peach County hauling wet or moist litter or waste which leaks, flows freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(b)  Any litter or waste hauled on a moving vehicle in Peach County shall he covered or secured in such a manner that the litter or waste will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public streets or roadways in Peach County. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets, or roadways, in restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited on the roads or adjoining areas of the county. However this section shall not prohibit the necessary spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 3) 
Sec. 38-84. - Regulation of garbage or litter containers or receptacles. 
(a)  All garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using garbage or litter containers or receptacles shall deposit all authorized garbage an refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container and receptacle. 
(d)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(f)  No person shall deposit large non-compactible articles in such containers or receptacles such as stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, mattresses, tires, large tree limbs, air conditioning units, or similar items. 
(g)  No one shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such containers or receptacles. 
(h)  No person shall place or scatter litter or waste in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(i)  No one shall scavenge or collect items from, in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 4) 
Sec. 38-85. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any premises in the unincorporated areas of Peach County shall allow litter or waste to accumulate thereon. No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and permission from the applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to, The Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Protection Division and/or The Georgia Forestry Service. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation, on his or her premises, of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(d)  The conduct described in paragraphs (a)—(c) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of the ordinance for each day the garbage or waste material remains on such premises. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 5) 
Sec. 38-86. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Magistrate Court of Peach County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; and/or 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the magistrate court, the violator may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right of way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution or sentence; and/or 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the magistrate court the person may he directed to pick up and remove litter from any public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter thereon, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(d)  The court may order the publication of the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(e)  In the case of any improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. Peach County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(f)  If any person, whether owner, tenant, agent or employee, owning, holding, or occupying property in Peach County shall fail or refuse to clean up all litter and waste from such property, within ten days written notice addressed to the owner of said property and delivered to said property by a county official or employee with a copy mailed by certified mail to the owner of said property as shown on the tax digest of Peach County, the county may remove said offensive matter from said property. Such matter shall be done at the expense of the owner of said property. Upon completion of such work, execution shall be issued upon application by the county by the magistrate court of Peach County against said owner and against said property for such expense and all costs. The person returning such property for taxation in the county, or the person against whom said property may be assessed in the event there has been no return of such property by the owner of same, shall be deemed to be the true owner of said property. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 6) 
Sec. 38-87. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Peach County Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee or the Peach County Sheriff or his/her designee. Any person or persons authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry on private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right of way, or upon such officer having received a complaint by a resident of Peach County, Georgia alleging a violation of this article. The magistrate court of Peach County shall also be authorized to issue summons for hearing on alleged violation of the article upon written accusation of any person sui juris alleging such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 7) 
Sec. 38-88. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
In the event that any person, firm, or corporation violates any provision of this ordinance, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 8) 
Sec. 38-89. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped, from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 9) 
Sec. 38-90. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 10) 
Sec. 38-91. - Recycling. 
The Peach County Board of Commissioners hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Peach County, in order to promote the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens if the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste material within the county and to reduce the overall solid waste materials which must he properly disposed of. Therefore, it is the policy of the Peach County Board of Commissioners to encourage recycling whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 4-11-00, § 11) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Related laws reference— Homestead exemption, art. IV. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; business and occupational license taxes and fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-22; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Sales and use tax imposed. 
There shall be imposed a special one percent sales and use tax, the proceeds of which shall be for capital outlay projects for the use of or benefit of the citizens of the county for a maximum period of time of five years: 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997 and 1998, and the maximum cost of the projects which will be funded from the proceeds of the tax shall be $7,000,000.00. 
(Res. of 7-27-93) 
Secs. 42-2—42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX ON GROSS DIRECT PREMIUMS 

Sec. 42-26. - Imposed. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer doing business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). The expression "gross direct premiums" shall mean such gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Secs. 42-27—42-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local business license tax for depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 42-46. - Purpose and interpretation. 
It is the purpose of this article to exercise the powers granted to the board of commissioners of the county to levy a business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as similar language contained in such statute. 
Sec. 42-47. - Levy of tax. 
For each year there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county. 
Sec. 42-48. - Rate of tax. 
The tax hereby levied shall be at the rate of 0.25 of a percent of gross receipts. 
Sec. 42-49. - Minimum tax. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing sections of this article, the minimum amount hereby levied upon each depository financial institution for any year shall be $1,000.00. 
Sec. 42-50. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution shall file an annual return of its gross receipts with the tax commissioner of the county on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue and shall be based upon the allocation method prescribed by law. The tax hereby levied shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return; provided, however, that if otherwise authorized by law, nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the county or the tax commissioner from taking reasonable steps to confirm the information set out in the returns, and to make such adjustments in the tax reported to be due as the circumstances warrant. 
Sec. 42-51. - Due date of tax. 
The tax levied hereby shall be due and payable on or before 30 days after the filing of the return to the tax commissioner. Taxes which are not timely paid shall be in default, and shall bear interest and be subject to such costs as are from time to time provided by this Code for delinquent ad valorem taxes. Taxes delinquent under the provisions of this article shall be subject to fi. fa. and collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes in the county. 
Secs. 42-52—42-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 42-71. - Purpose. 
All taxes collected pursuant to this article at a rate in excess of three percent shall be expended by the county for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows or for other such use as may be permitted by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 3; Ord. of 6-14-05) 
Sec. 42-72. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The excise tax imposed in this article shall not apply to any fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(b)  The excise tax imposed in this article shall not apply to any fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 42-73. - Contract with chamber of commerce. 
The board of commissioners of the county is hereby authorized to enter into a contract with the county chamber of commerce as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) for the expenditure of such taxes collected at a rate in excess of three percent for the purposes permitted by such code section. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 4; Ord. of 6-14-05) 
Sec. 42-74. - Filing of returns. 
All returns with the tax then due shall be filed with the office of the board of commissioners of the county in the form provided for by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 6) 
Sec. 42-75. - Deductions. 
Each person collecting the tax authorized by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be as is provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-13-52. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 7) 
Sec. 42-76. - Delinquency. 
The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. The board of commissioners may, and, when any tax becomes delinquent under this article, shall issue a fi. fa. for the collection of the tax, interest and penalty for each delinquent taxpayer. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 5) 
Sec. 42-77. - Failure to keep records. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value in the county to fail to keep records of the revenues or fees collected or the accommodations furnished, or to fail to open the records to inspection as required by the board of commissioners upon request by such board of commissioners or its duly appointed agents. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 8) 
Sec. 42-78. - Failure to collect tax. 
It shall be unlawful for any person furnishing public accommodations for value subject to the provisions of this article to fail, neglect or refuse to collect the tax provided for in this article either by himself or through his agents or employees. In addition to the penalty of being liable for and paying the tax himself, any person who violates this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 9) 
Sec. 42-79. - False or fraudulent returns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person furnishing public accommodations for value subject to the provisions of this article to make, render, sign or verify any return or to make a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax levied by this article. Any person who violates this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 10) 
Sec. 42-80. - Penalties. 
When any person who furnishes public accommodations for value subject to the provisions of this article fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed in addition to other penalties provided by law a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of three percent or $3.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is not for more than 30 days; and an additional three percent or $3.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(Ord. of 10-13-87, § 11) 
Sec. 42-81. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. of 6-14-05) 
Secs. 42-82—42-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION 

Sec. 42-101. - Exemptions. 
From and after January 1, 1995, 40 percent of the value of any inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, finished goods manufactured or produced and stored finished goods manufactured or produced within the county shall be exempt from taxation pursuant to the freeport exemption provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
(Ord. of 2-8-94) 
Secs. 42-102—42-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OCCUPATION TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by an ordinance adopted Dec. 27, 1995, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as superseding the provisions of former Art. VI, §§ 42-111—42-138, relative to occupation taxes, which derived from §§ 1—28 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1994. Sections 1—28 of said ordinance adopted Dec. 27, 1995, have been included herein as a new Art. VI, §§ 42-111—42-138. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 42-111. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in Peach County. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Peach County, Georgia, whether with a location in Peach County or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Peach County, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Peach County, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the building official or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of said Peach County, Georgia, upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 1) 
Sec. 42-112. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Peach County is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Peach County, Georgia; wherever the term county is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Peach County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(3)  Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(4)  [ Gross receipts: ] 
a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without being limited to the following: 
(i)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
(ii)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(iii)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(iv)  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
(v)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(i)  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
(ii)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(iii)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
(iv)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
(v)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
(vi)  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
(5)  Home occupation: A business, trade or profession conducted solely by the owner at one location. 
(6)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(7)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
(8)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 51 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
(9)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(10)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the local government. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 2) 
Sec. 42-113. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is $25.00. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 3) 
Sec. 42-114. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents; 
(B)  Occupation tax schedule: 
Number of employees— The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the building official: 

 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 4; Mo. of 5-11-2015) 
Sec. 42-115. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Peach County and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Peach County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Peach County. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 5) 
Sec. 42-116. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in Peach County shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 6) 
Sec. 42-117. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in Peach County. 
When a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 7) 
Sec. 42-118. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), Paragraphs 1 through 18. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (20) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 42-113. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 8) 
Sec. 42-119. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 9) 
Sec. 42-120. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only-applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. No fee shall be charged to ascertain whether a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 10) 
Sec. 42-121. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to a 10 percent penalty. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Peach County in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days after beginning business and a 10 percent penalty imposed. 
(b)  When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(c)  In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 11) 
Sec. 42-122. - Exemption of state and local authorities and nonprofit organizations. 
No tax or fee shall be levied on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 12) 
Sec. 42-123. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable. 
Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the Peach County registration may be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 13) 
Sec. 42-124. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a Peach County business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 14) 
Sec. 42-125. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this ordinance shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this ordinance, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Peach County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Peach County, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 15) 
Sec. 42-126. - When registration and tax due and payable. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 31 of each year, and on March 31 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in Peach County after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the building official, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Peach County, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 16) 
Sec. 42-127. - Building official; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The building official and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the Business Tax Ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 17) 
Sec. 42-128. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 18) 
Sec. 42-129. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 19) 
Sec. 42-130. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to Peach County, at the office of the building official, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 31 each year. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 20) 
Sec. 42-131. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of Peach County in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 1) 
Sec. 42-132. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 22) 
Sec. 42-133. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the Building Official of Peach County, Georgia, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of twelve percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 23) 
Sec. 42-134. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 24) 
Sec. 42-135. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the county commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 25) 
Sec. 42-136. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 26) 
Sec. 42-137. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 27) 
Sec. 42-138. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-27-95, § 28) 
Secs. 42-139—42-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 9-10-2013, §§ 1—10, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. VII, §§ 42-151—42-160, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 42-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer," "energy," "local sales and use tax," and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 42-152. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2.3. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 2) 
Sec. 42-153. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of Peach County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (1)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of Peach County shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 3) 
Sec. 42-154. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), such excise tax shall be: 
(1)  Imposed only at the time sales and use tax on the sale or use of such energy would have been due and payable under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-30 but for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  Due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as other provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3)  A debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(4)  Remitted to the governing authority of Peach County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(5)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 4) 
Sec. 42-155. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of Peach County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 42-158 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. An energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed pursuant to this article if the purchaser has failed to submit such uniform exemption certificate to the energy provider. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 5) 
Sec. 42-156. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on October 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of Peach County monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 6) 
Sec. 42-157. - Allocation, distribution and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), the excise tax proceeds shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of Peach County at the end of each calendar month. An amount equal to one percent of such proceeds collected by Peach County shall be paid into the general fund of Peach County to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder shall be distributed in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement as required under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b) and (c). Within 30 days following the end of each calendar month, the remainder shall be distributed to the general fund of Peach County and the general fund of each participating municipality in accordance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(c)(1) or (2) as follows: 
(1)  If two local sales and use taxes are in effect in the special district, an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund of Peach County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the first local sales and use tax, and an amount equal to one-half of the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Peach County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in such county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the second local sales and use tax; or 
(2)  If only one such local sales and use tax is in effect in the special district, then the proceeds of the excise tax shall be distributed to the general fund of Peach County and the general fund of each participating municipality located in the county according to the same proportionate share as specified under the distribution provisions of the local sales and use tax. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, proceeds of the excise tax deposited in the general fund of Peach County may be expended for any lawful purpose as determined by the governing authority of Peach County. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 7) 
Sec. 42-158. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of Peach County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 8) 
Sec. 42-159. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 9) 
Sec. 42-160. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective October 1, 2013. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2013, § 10) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as the traffic regulations of the county with the same effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
Sec. 46-2 - Off-road vehicles. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Access means to a place where ORVs can be lawfully operated. 
Operate means to ride in or on, and be actual control of the operation of an ORV. 
ORV or off-road vehicle means a motor driven off-road recreational vehicle capable of cross-country travel with out benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track or multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, and amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation driven by power from a source other than muscle or wind. "ORV" or vehicle does not include a snowmobile, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function. This includes, but is not limited to, ORVs commonly known as three-wheelers and four-wheelers. 
Public highway or public roadway means that portion of a county road that is improved, maintained and used by the public for vehicular travel, including any improved shoulders. 
(b)  Any person operating an "ORV" vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and shall be punishable as provided by subsection (c); 
(1)  Without operative brakes or without mufflers or other silencing equipment. 
(2)  On any public property, including, but not limited to, any road or right-of-way under the possession or control of the county, except property designated by the board of commissioners for use by "ORV" vehicles; 
(3)  On any private property without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent, proof of which shall be in the immediate possession of the operator of a off-road vehicle at all times when operating such vehicle and which shall be displayed upon demand of any law enforcement officer. 
(c)  Any person who violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of no more than $500.00 or imprisonment for 90 days, or both, and full restitution of any damages caused or experienced as a result thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-10-2012) 
Chapter 50 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; junkyards and salvage operations, § 18-81 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; nuisances, § 26-26 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEED AND BRUSH CONTROL 

Sec. 50-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling or building means any dwelling, building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging to or usually enjoyed therewith, and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-27. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who is found guilty of violating this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 6) 
Sec. 50-28. - Responsibility of owner; tenant; employee to clear. 
Every person, whether owner, tenant, agent or employee, owning, holding or occupying property in the unincorporated areas of the county which is: 
(1)  Three acres or less in total area; or 
(2)  Is located in a platted subdivision which plat is recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court; or 
(3)  Is located in a platted subdivision which has been approved by the county planning and zoning commission; and 
(4)  Any portion of which property lies within 300 feet of a dwelling or building; shall keep all grass, weeds, wild bushes or underbrush in conformity with section 50-30 of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 1; Ord. of 9-13-05) 
Sec. 50-29. - Failure to clear after notice; violation. 
If any such person shall fail or refuse to cut and remove weeds, grass, wild bushes or underbrush from the property within ten days after notice by the county zoning officer, the county sheriff or any of his lawful deputies, any law enforcement officer of the state, the county health inspector or sanitarian, or the county public works superintendent, then such person shall, upon conviction, be guilty of violating this article and punishable according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 2) 
Sec. 50-30. - Maximum height of weeds; violation. 
The growth of grass, weeds, wild bushes and underbrush to a height in excess of 18 inches above the ground shall be deemed a violation of this article and, upon conviction, punishable according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 3) 
Sec. 50-31. - Determination of responsible party. 
(a)  The owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed to be the party responsible; provided, however, that if on the property, lot, building or premises there exists a building containing four or less than four living or business units or establishments, the occupants of such living or business units or establishments shall be deemed the responsible party provided, however, that the owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed to be the party responsible for reimbursing the county for any expenses incurred in correcting conditions existing on the property in violation of this article. If the lease or rental agreement or contract between the owner and occupants specifically states or names the party responsible for clearing or cutting such grass, weeds, wild bushes or underbrush, whether he is the owner or occupant and regardless of the number of living or business units or establishments which the business or premises may contain, then such specified party shall be held responsible provided, however, that the owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed to be the party responsible for reimbursing the county for any expenses incurred in correcting conditions existing on the property in violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any property, lot, building or premises, occupied or vacant, shall be deemed the party responsible for reimbursing the county the expense of correcting any conditions existing on the property in violation of this article. 
(c)  At its option and in addition to all other remedies provided for in this article, the county may correct conditions existing on property in violation of this article, keeping any account for the expenses of same, and charge the total cost against the owner to be collected by any lawful means including but not limited to the issuance of a fi. fa. against the owner personally and in rem against said property. 
(Ord. of 9-8-87, § 5; Ord. of 9-13-05) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 